Page | 1
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
Week 3 - Transcript
Video 1: Differentiation: Function of Single Variable
So, in this calculus, again like linear algebra, this calculus also has a lot of topics that could be really need to be covered, which will be a kind of one entire semester course. But however, what we are going to see as a part of the calculus is mainly the differentiation operations, which is very essential part, which forms a.
So, what we do as a part of the differentiation is that first we will look into what is called as the functions of single variable, and then later we go to the functions of multiple variables and the functions, vectors of functions and all those things we will see at the later stages. So, now coming to this differentiation operations, basically the definition of a differentiation if you see, it is a process of finding the derivatives of a function. And this derivative what we get as a part of the differentiation operation, so it is basically it indicates the rate of change of a function with respect to the variable which defines that particular function. For example, let x be a scalar variable, because currently we are looking into a variable having the single value and the functions defined on that, f of x is a function of the single variable. So, if this function f of x is differentiable, then that differentiation is mathematically denoted as, it is a d into f of x divided by the d of x. That means, in short it is also called as the f dash of x, this indicating the differentiation of the function f of x with respect to x.
The first question comes is, why it is needed for us? That too in the machine learning algorithms, why this differentiation is important? Later we are going to see that most of the machine learning algorithms, they use a lot of optimisation problem to minimise or maximise the cost functions. So, especially during the learning the parameters by this machine learning algorithm, all these different optimis
ations are mainly defined by using this differentiation operation. That is exactly the reason why we need a differentiation is concerned.
Now, I say continuing this, so as a part of this differentiation on the single variables, so there are lot of rules that applies on the differentiation operation. So, one of the rule is what is called as the constant rule. That means, that if you differentiate, the function is a constant value which is and the differentiation of that constant value is always leads to 0. For example, let k is equal to 5 and then if I do the differentiation of 5 with respect to the variable x, so here 5 is a constant which is nowhere dependent upon the variable x. So, its differentiation will be equal to 0. It is a very simple and first rule associated to the differentiation.
Continuing that, the next rule what we are going to see is what is called as the power rule. So, here suppose my function on the scalar variable is x to the power of n, where n is some constant which is having the value non -negative. So, in that scenario, so when the differentiation of x to
Page | 2
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
the power of n by the d of x, so this leads to what is called as the n into x to the power of n minus 1. For example, let f of x is x squared plus, so f of x is 2 into x square. So, now if I do the differentiation of this 2 x square by with respect to x, so this leads to as per this thing, so 2 into this, the power will come down here into x to the power of 2 minus 1 which leads to what is called as the 4 into x. So, this is the result associated to that.
And in another example, let us take f of x is equal to x to the power of minus 1. This is essentially the 1 by x. When you do the differentiation of this x to the power of minus 1 with respect to the x, so what we get as per this power rule, what we get is minus 1 times the x to the power of minus 1 minus 1 which leads to minus 1 times the x to the power of minus 2 which is essentially minus 1 by x squared. So, this is what is called as the power rule.
Now, going further, what we have is called as the sum rule. So, the sum rule says, suppose we have the 2 functions f of x plus g of x is a function. Now, the differentiation of this sum of these 2 functions will be the differentiation of the individual functions and summing them. That is what is the differentiation of the, that is what the sum rule says. So, again as an example, if you consider my f of x as a function of x cube plus x squared minus 2. Now, if you really see here, this particular function has 3 terms. Each term, you can individually, you can consider as each function and then we are doing the differentiation of that. Now, d of f of x can be now seen as the differentiation of this each x squared, sorry x cube plus x squared minus 2, this function by the, with respect to the x.
So, in this case, so now with respect to the first term, differentiation with respect to the first term, again now applying the power rule, it becomes 3 into x to the power of 3 minus 1, that is 2. Now, with respect to the second term, the differentiation will be, this is the sum of the 2 times the x to the power of 2 minus 1, that is nothing but the 1 and then last term is a constant term, differentiation of a constant term is a 0, ultimately. So, for this given function x cube plus x squared minus 2, the differentiation of this with respect to x will turns out to be 3 into x squared plus 2 x. This is the sum rule, is an example for that.
Now, continuing that, what we have is a product. So, here we have the 2 functions, g of x and f of x and g of x are the 2 functions. Now, the differentiation of the product of this will be something like this. So, differentiation of f of x into g of x with respect to x, it can be seen as, it is the f of x times the differentiation of the second function, that is g of x with respect to the x plus the second function g of x times the differentiation of f of x with respect to the dx.
So, now as an example, if we consider f of x as something like x squared minus 2 into x minus 4 or x plus 4 as a function. Now, in this particular case, so this is my, one of my function, say for example, this we can consider as a, let us consider this as a g of x and this is a function, let us consider it as a h of x. Now, differentiation of my f of x will be the differentiation of the 2 functions here, which is g of x into h of x here with respect to the x. So, as per the rules, now we can see here
Page | 3
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
is that, so now this becomes the g of x into the differentiation of h of x with respect to the x plus h of x into differentiation of the g of x with respect to x. So, that will be here and there.
Now, if you see here, what is my g of x here? This is x squared minus 2. We are keeping that as it is, x squared minus 2. Then the differentiation of h of x, h of x is x plus 2. So, now the differentiation of x plus 2 is, so it has the first term, which is the differentiation of x. It turns out to be 1 and the second term is a constant, that is 0. So, this is nothing but the x squared minus 1 into 1. This is for the first term. Second term, what is h of x? This is x minus 4. We keep that x minus 4 as it is. Now, the differentiation of the g of x, g of x is x squared minus 2. So, it has 2 terms now. So, that is the first term, which using the power rule, we get the 2 into x and then second term is a constant. Its differentiation is 1. So, that is 1. So, Now, ultimately we get the expression x squared minus 2 plus 2 x squared minus 4. When we further simplify this, it becomes 3 x squared minus 6. This is the product rule associated to that.
Another rule is what is called the quotient rule. So, that is, the function is of the form of the f of x by g of x, that is the ratio of f of x to the g of x. So, the differentiation of such a quotient thing, that will be a little complicated function here. So, in that scenario, the one which is the denominator can be seen as the numerator. It will have the g of x into differentiation of f of x with respect to x minus the f of x to the differentiation of g of x to the dx and whole upon that in the denominator will be the g of x whole square.
So, as an example, if you consider the equation as x cubed minus x squared divided by something like an x, if this is my function, so let us consider this is my function g of x. Now, in this case, the numerator is the, what we call this as a, maybe this is a, I will call this as a h of x and then the denominator is what I call it as a g of x here. Now, as per the quotient rule, now the differentiation of this x cube minus x squared by x. So, maybe for the simplicity, we can take this another constant plus 1 over here. That would be better in order to avoid the ambiguities associated to that.
So, g of x, so this will be, so now as per the rules, so what goes in the numerator is that g of x terms. So, this is g of x equivalent to that is the denominator here g of x, that is nothing but the x. This will be the x into differentiation of x cube minus x squared plus 1, then minus f of x is the x cube minus x squared plus 1 into the denominator 1 is the d of x by dx. And then the denominator, it says, you see g of x squared, that is nothing but the x is that will be having the x square. When we further differentiate in this, what will happen is that it is the x into, this becomes 3 times the x squared first term, second time is the 2 times the x and x term is a constant. So, it becomes 0 plus 0 and minus what we have is the here x cube minus x squared plus 1 into differentiation of x with respect to x, it will be the 1 itself, then whole divided by x square. So, one can further solve this equation, simplify this equation to get the final solution, but this is what how they apply the quotient rule onto the function when there is a function of x which is having the both numerator term and the denominator term will be having there.
Page | 4
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
And the next one is what we have is, it is called as the chain rule. So, in the chain rule, this is something like a function of functions which will be casted in there. So, let f of u be a function on the view and, but u is a function of the g of x. So, that is f of g of x, this is the form of a function, then the chain rule will be applied such that it will be the first we apply the differentiation on the f of that g of x itself and then product and multiplied with the differentiation of the function which is within the function f that is a d of g of x into g x dx.
So, this kind of a functions are pretty much common when a particular function is present within a another function. For example, let us consider a function y as a log of x square. So, here log is a log of some function that is a and then this is a x square is a function within that log function. So, here in this case my g of x is the function x square here and f of x is nothing, but the it is the log of log of x square is my first function. So, as per the chain rule this becomes the differentiation of the log of this x square with respect to dx.
So, one rule you should be knowing here is that the differentiation of the log x with respect to x is nothing, but 1 by x. Now, as a part of this when we do this differentiation this becomes differentiation of log of x square with respect to dx into the log of differentiation of x square with respect to x. This turns out that. So, now differentiation of log of x square if you really see that it becomes 1 by x square multiplied with the differentiation of x square is nothing, but using the power rule it becomes 2 into x. It turns out to be it is 1 x plus whatever it is left out will be the 2 by x. So, this is one of the expression what we are going to see as a part of this.
Another function which is very commonly comes as a function of function which will be usually using in the various expressions of the machine learning are the exponential function exp of suppose minus x squared by 2. Suppose if I consider here this is the exponential function will be one of the commonly which you are using here. So, this you can see that this is of the f of g of x form it is there. So, here in this case f of x is the exponential function and then the differentiate and the x square minus x square by 2 is the g of x term.
So, now here when we are doing the differentiation of exponential of the minus x squared by 2 when you do this with respect to the x. So, this becomes the differentiation of the exponential of the x squared by 2 with respect to the dx multiplied with the differentiation of minus of x squared by 2 with respect to dx. So, now here again the rule is that the differentiation of exponential of any x with respect to x it is nothing but the it is nothing but the one differentiation of exponential of function is nothing but one. So, as a result so what happens here is that. So, this becomes whatever the things which is there one of x itself. So, that is whatever the inside the function of exponential is there. So, that itself turns out to be the differentiation of exponential operation itself.
Now the first term in this case it becomes minus x squared by 2 into the differentiation of minus x squared by 2 this is nothing but it is again the minus 2 x by 2 this 2 and 2 goes as cancels out
Page | 5
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
and what is left out is minus x cube by 2 by simplifying this. So, this is what is called as the chain rule.
So, specifically I take an example with respect differentiation of a log x and differentiation of the exponential x because later we are going to see that in the various machine learning algorithms. So, especially when we look into the various distributions like marble distributions and all the things and the differentiation of such expressions would happen. So, these rules play a very important role over.
So, now with all these rules. So, basically these are the rules what we have seen so far is to basic differentiation operations what needs to be whenever we need to come and need to be performed on the functions. So, one has to follow that and so one can refer to various exercises to practice on the various differentiation operations is concerned with, but this is what the basic things you should be knowing it whenever we are discussing about the various terms associated to the machine learning algorithms and when such differentiation comes into picture.
So, now the differentiation of a function. So, basically it actually or from the geometrically if you see that it gives a very important information about the data that is there. So, the geometrically the meaning of the differentiation of a function with respect to x it is actually giving us a what is called as the slope of the tangent to the curve at x. Suppose the f of x is a function of the variable suppose this is my curve what I am having here this is my f of x. So, if you put a tangent at any point x what is the slope of that particular tangent at a point on this curve. So, that is what is the given by this differentiation operation. So, this is the geometrical meaning of the differentiation and this slope of a tangent of the curve at x. So, this is technically called as a gradient of curve at x.
So, the basically gradient gives the slope of the curve slope of the tangent of the curve at the particular point x and that has a very important significance in various operations which we are going to do that. So, as I was mentioning. So, the gradient is typically it is represented by a inverted triangle symbol this suffix x indicating that at that particular point x what is the gradient of that function f of x that is the meaning of that and that is what is given by the differentiation of the function with respect to x this is the geometrical meaning of that right.
So, now to understand this gradient better let us take an example my function is f of x is x squared minus 4 x plus 2 remember here I am taking the function of single variable entire function is having the same single variable x here. So, x squared minus 4 x plus 2. So, when you take the multiple values for different values for x and then if you plot this particular function it gives a curve as a parabola right. Now if you really look into here now if I consider the differentiation of this function with respect to x that is nothing, but when I compute a gradient of the function. So, what you get to get is that this is 2 x minus 4. So, this is the my gradient at x right now interestingly we define that gradient is nothing, but it is basically it is a slope of the tangent at x for this curve right.
Page | 6
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
Now suppose if I consider x is equal to 10 ok when my x is equal to 10 if I substitute this x is equal to 10 into the equation of my gradient it turns out to be what is called as the 60 that is the gradient at of f of x at 10 that turns out to be 60. So, now if you really see that. So, this is exactly in this particular case. So, the gradient or it is a tangent has been put in that particular point and the slope of the tangent is nothing, but the 60. Now we can see that the positive value. So, the slope is a positive slope similarly if an x value is equal to minus 10. So, my the I substituting the minus 10 into this equation of my gradient. So, it becomes what is called as a minus 24 that means, that the gradient at x is equal to 10 here. So, this is turns out to be what is called as a negative slope and interestingly if I consider x is equal to 0 that means, substituting 0 to this gradient equation. So, my gradient is still a negative gradient that is nothing, but it is a negative slope associated to that.
Now when you take x is equal to 2 and if you look into the substitute into that equation of my gradient there. So, it becomes 2 into 24 minus 4 that is equal to 0 that means, gradient is equal to 0 for this particular function when x is equal to 2 that means, that at x is equal to 2 the gradient is equal to 0. So, this you can see here is that the value of the f of x the function at x is equal to 2 is what you see here is that is nothing, but the minus 1. Now if you look into any of the other values this function is having the function getting the value minus 1 this is the minimum among all other values what it has taken for this function for the different values of x. So, you can see one conclusion what you can come here is that one interpretation is that when the gradient of a curve at x is 0 then that particular function has a minimum value at that particular x value. Now in this particular case the gradient of this function is 0 when x is equal to 2 right and that means, when x is equal to 2 the f of x will have the very minimum value out here. So, that is the meaning of this.
Similarly, if i take the another example here the function is minus x squared minus 4 x plus 2 this is again it going to give you a another quadratic curve which is nothing, but a parabola you are seeing here, but it is a inverted one as compared to the previous one. Now here also when you take the gradient that is the differentiation of this particular function with respect to x what we get is the expression minus 2 x minus 4 this is the equation of my gradient here. Now here like what we did in the previously if i take x is equal to positive value plus 10 then my f of x value is somewhere it is called as the minus 137 somewhere here and then its gradient is observed to be minus 24 this is basically a negative gradient.
Similarly, when it is x is equal to plus 10 so then the f of x value will be somewhere here in the minus 57 and if you look into the slope of the tangent or the gradient is a positive gradient which is a 16 is a value what it has taken there. Similarly, when the gradient at 0 when x is equal to 0 the gradient is still a minus 4 which is a negative. Now when the x is minus 2 here then the gradient becomes 0 all right. So here so now in this particular equation when the gradient is equal to 0 of a function is 0 what it interprets is that in for this particular function the f of x will have the maximum value at that particular x which makes the gradient 0 all right.
Page | 7
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
So from both these expressions equations we can see that when a gradient is equal to 0 for any value of x right at that particular x my function will have either a maximum value or the minimum value. This is an one of the important observations which play a very important role in the optimisation problem what you're going to see at the later stage okay which is forms a very important backbone of various machine learning algorithms which we're going to see at the later stage right. So this is the interpretation of a differentiation which acts in the form of a gradient here all right.
So to give a formal things into that so what we've seen so far is what is called as the first order derivative that means the differentiation of the function with respect to x okay. So we also have differentiation of a differentiation if you go for it then it becomes a second derivative or the second order derivative of a function it is nothing but the derivative of a derivation of a function f of x okay that is it is denoted as the d squared f of x divided by the dx squared that is derivation of a derivative of a derivation derivative of the function f of x that means that d of dx differentiation of the function differentiation of itself okay and this is interpreted as it like first order derivative is given as the f dash of x is the interpretation so f double dash of x will be the interpretation for the second order derivative all right.
As an example let's consider f of x is x squared minus 6 x plus 3 let this be an equation this is function now when i do the differentiation of second order derivative of this function it will be equal to differentiation of the differentiation right of the function x squared minus 6 x plus 3 with respect to x so this turns out that it's a differentiation resultant of the first order differentiative it is becomes the nothing but the 2 x minus 6 okay and it's further differentiation it turns out to be the equation to be a constant 2 all right so this is what is the second order derivative is concerned with okay soon we're going to see that what is the importance of the second order derivative in the context of the optimisation what we're going to see at the later stage all right.
So uh just to conclude what we have seen so far is that we just define what is the first order derivative okay and also later we looked into the what is called as the second order derivative so basically we discussed about the differentiation different rules of differentiations which are essential for that and most importantly important interpretation of the differentiation as the first order derivative is considered to be as a as a gradient of the function indicating the slope of the tangent of the function at that particular value x right so with this we'll move further onto the differentiation on the different variables multiple variables that is what we call it as the differentiation on the function of vectors.
Video 2: Differentiation: Function of a Vector
Just now what we saw is the function of a single variable and the differentiation of that. Continuing from that is to the function of multiple variables we can see that and then the differentiation of such a multiple variables. So let us try to understand what do you mean by the function of multiple variables. Let p, q and r are the three scalar variables and now I define a
Page | 8
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
function on these three variables that f takes the input as arguments as a p, q and r f of p, q, r is a function of these three variables. They are considered to be as a function of multiple variables.
For example f of p, q, r is considered with p, q plus 2q minus 4r square plus 10. If you look into this particular expression or this particular function it is a function of the three variables. This is what I was talking about the function of multiple variables. Now if I consider x1 as p, x2 as q and x3 as r and then if I consider this x1, x2, x3 as variables of my vector x, then this function of multiple variables can be seen as a function of a vector. That means function of f of p, q, r is also equal to the f of x1, x2, x3 where if I consider this x1, x2, x3 as variables of my vector x then it can be considered as a function of vector.
What we are going to see here is that now what we have seen previously is the function of a scalar variable. Now we are going to see it is a function of a vector. Now the differentiation of function of vectors is what we are interested in now. So that is what we will be looking into the case. So typically if you consider any system which are having the multiple inputs, then the outcome of a system is a single output variable then it resembles what is called as the form of the y is equal to f of x form where y is the outcome of the things which is a scalar variable of this. Basically x1, x2, xd they are the d input variables to my system. System is some kind of a function of these d variables that nothing but the function of this vector and outcome of that particular function is a scalar variable.
So this is typically a kind of a notion that comes in various algorithms which we were designing in the machine learning algorithms or various operations vector multiplication vector matrix multiplications or the operations which we have seen so which forms into this particular form that is considered to be as a function of multiple variables. So now what we are interested in here is the differentiation of such a function of vectors.
Now let x be the vector of d variables is a typical representation of a vector mutation. So now f of x f of the vector x is a function on the d variables. Now interestingly now here what happens is that when you perform the differentiation of a function that means the differentiation of a function of the vector with respect to what is called as the vector because each of the individual each of the variables of this vector here. Now this is results into what is called as the partial derivative of the function with respect to each of the variable. Now i am introducing a new term what is called as the partial derivative.
What i am seeing so far is when i represent this as a d it is called as a derivative. Now what is this partial derivative? Basically this partial derivative is represented as what is called as the symbol this which is called as dou. So this dou symbol indicating the dou of the function with respect to one of the variable x1. So that is what is called as the partial derivative.
Now basically what is happening here is that the differentiation of a function of multiple variables is nothing but a vector of the differentiation of the function with respect to each of the individual
Page | 9
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
variable. It is not just a differentiation it is called as a partial differentiation. The partial differentiation comes because the my function is a function of multiple variable but i am differentiating with respect to one of the several variables in that particular function that is why the reason is called as a partial derivative.
So you can see that partial derivative is a function f of x with respect to a particular variable xi is a derivative of f of x with respect to that x. And it will be denoted as the vector of the partial derivative of the individual variables. So this is the thing. Now you can note down here is that the differentiation of a function of vectors leads to what is called as the vector.
Okay and now if you look into the each individual vector individual values of this derivative vector right so this are nothing but the gradient of the function with respect to a one particular variable right. That is why this entire this derivative is called as the gradient vector and it is represented as the inverted triangle and a bar upon that indicating that it is a gradient vector at the value x vector for that function of the vectors.
Okay so the gradient vector basically it indicates so now we can imagine that the instead of my input variable is the multiple variables now i am dealing with not a curve in the multiple variables i am dealing with the surface. Now the gradient vector indicating the basically it is the slope of the tangent of surface in all the directions in each of the directions x1 x2 up to xd.
Okay that is what is the gradient vector it is associated with that. Okay so most importantly as i mentioned the derivative of a function of vector results into what is called as the vector itself. Okay as an example let us consider that the d is equal to 2 that means a vector of two variables x1 and x2.
Now if i consider a function of the two variables x1 and x2 let that be the 2 into x1 square plus 3 into x2 square plus 5 into x1 x2 minus x1 plus x2 plus 6. If you look into this function it is a function of two variables. Okay now if i want to compute the derivative of this function with respect to the vector x.
Okay now we can see that it starts with the partial derivative of the function with respect to each of the individual variables. How many variables are there? Two variables are there. Now if you take the partial derivative of the function f of x with respect to the first variable x1.
Now when you do the differentiation of this first variable x1 so this leads to with respect to the first term it going to give you based on the power rule it becomes 2 into x1 that is 2 into 2 that's a 4 into x1 with respect to the first term. With respect to the second term we do not have the x1 term. So since only the x2 term is there differentiation of the second term with respect to only the x1 this leads to 0 and then the third one we have the both x1 and x2 are there which leads to plus 5 into x2.
Page | 10
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
Okay differentiation of x1 only now next step it is a minus of x1 the x1 term that is existing there the differentiation of this x1 with respect to the x1 is going to give you the minus 1. The rest two terms x2 and 6 these are the terms in which the x1 terms are not there so differentiation of both these two terms leads to 0 and the resultant of this partial derivative of this function with respect to the first variable x1 is nothing but the 4 x1 plus 5 x2 minus 1.
Now the next thing is that the derivative of partial derivative of this function with respect to the second term x2 when you do the partial derivative of the second term x2 now if you look into this now the first term it doesn't have any x2 terms so the derivative of that will become 0. Now the second term is the x2 term so this turns out to be it is nothing but the 3 into 2 6 x2 is the first term.
Next third term has both x1 and x2 terms are there now we are differentiating with respect to the x2 term that turns out that plus 5 x1 then the next term doesn't have any x2 term the derivative becomes 0 and the next term is x2 derivative becomes 1 this plus 1 and last term is a constant its derivative will be 0. So what is the resultant of partial derivative with respect to the second term is 6 x2 plus 5 x1 plus 1.
Now as per the definition of this differentiation of a function of multiple variables it is basically it is a vector of the partial derivatives with respect to the x1 partial derivative with respect to x2 are the two terms of that. What is the partial derivative with respect to x1 this is the first expression for x1 plus 5 x2 minus 1 and the second term is the it's a vector of these two functions or these two derivatives. So this is nothing but it is a gradient vector and each term are the gradient in that respect to x1 direction in the x2 direction.
So this is the illustration of it. Now here again as a part of the illustration if you hear now suppose this is my gradient vector here now the suppose the same kind of a interpretation if you're going to give when we're dealing with the function of the single variable.
Now if you look into this case suppose if i consider the x1 is equal to 1 and x2 is equal to 2 and this is a point where i wanted to find the slope of the tangent of that particular surface right now x1 is equal to 1 and x2 is equal to 2 so with respect to that my gradient at that particular point it becomes in x1 direction it is 13 and x2 direction it is 80.
Basically i substituted x1 is equal to 1 and x2 is equal to 2 in this expression expressions of the gradient vectors okay and turns out that my gradient vector is 13 2 for this particular value of x vector okay basically it is interpreted as the slope of the function f of x is at the point 1 and 2 is 13 in the direction of x1 and 18 in the direction of x2 okay basically we need to keep in mind that when a gradient of the function of vector is computed it going to give you the slope of the tangent at the point in the direction of each of the variables of my vector x.
Now this gradient of the function of vectors what we seen here it has a lot of implications in various vector operations what we have seen in the previous courses because they all play a very important role in some algorithms of the machine learning and one of the things which leads to
Page | 11
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
what is called as the function of a vector okay is what we have seen earlier is what is called the dot product between the two vectors.
Now if you consider the x vector and the y vector each one of the vectors of the d elements that i am having there both of the vectors of multiple variables how many variables d variables are there now if i consider this as a dot product operations that is x transpose y it is basically a function of two vectors x and y all right now what is the resultant of the dot product you know that when you perform the dot product operation x transpose y we have observed that it results into a scalar variable x so that means that it is falls under the same category where my the system is the function of x where i am having the multiple input variables x1 x2 up to xd is the variables are there if i consider the y vector as a constant here with a fixed variables only the inputs are only the in these things whatever things i am getting as an output a it is the scalar which is nothing but the x transpose y which is a some sort of a function of x okay by keeping the y as a constant here all right so if in that particular sense you can see that if i want to perform the derivative of this particular function with respect to one of the variable one of the vector x okay then the differentiation of this dot product with respect to the x vector it turns out to be what is called as the y vector okay how that is that let us see this with respect to an illustration with respect to by considering the number of variables is 2 when the d is equal to the vector x takes the two variables x1 and x2 and vector y can be represented with the two variables y1 and y2 now the dot product of x transpose y it turns out to be basically x1 y1 plus x2 y2 so we have done this in the previous discussions okay so it is that one can refer that okay so now when i compute the differentiation of this x transpose y with respect to x then what happens when you differentiating this with respect to the x so what we get with respect to the what we get so basically we need to do the partial derivative with respect to the x1 and also we need to do the partial derivative with respect to the x2 when i do the partial derivative with respect to the x1 what i'm going to get with respect to that is only the the y1 because second term doesn't have the x1 terms and then the partial derivative of the same expression with respect to the x2 when i do that what is left out is only the y2 okay now since both these two things forms a vector so if see that it is nothing but the y vector.
This is what we are seeing with respect to this. On the contrary, if I want to do the derivative of this function with respect to y, by keeping the x as a constant here, then differentiation of that is going to give me what is called as the x vector. This is in the same way in the illustration when you do that. So, this is what my dot product equations would have going there.
So, now if I want to do the differentiation with respect to the y vector, that means that I am doing the partial derivative of this function with respect to y1 and also I am doing the partial derivative of this function with respect to the y2. So, by doing that what is left out is that when I do the partial derivative of this expression with respect to y1, so only the x1 leaves out in the first term and the second term only the x2 leaves out when I do the partial derivative with respect to y2. This is nothing but the vector x.
Page | 12
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
This is one of the implications of what I was showing the differentiation of the function of vectors. So, here the dot product operation is considered to be one of the function of vectors. Going further, there are many other things are there.
So, now what if I do the differentiation of the squared norm of the vector? What do you mean by the squared norm of the vector? It is nothing but it is the dot product of the vector with itself. So, it is a squared norm of the thing. So, you can refer to that what we have seen in the earlier discussions.
Now, the derivative of the squared norm that is x transpose x with respect to the vector x, it turns out to be what is called as the 2 times the vector X. Again, continuing our discussions in the same way as we seen in the previously, the considering the x having the 2 variables considering d is equal to 2.
Now, the dot product between the x to itself is turns out to be x 1 square plus x 2 square. Now, the differentiation of this x 1 square plus x 2 square with respect to the vector x is nothing but the partial derivative of this function with respect to x 1 and the partial derivative of this function with respect to x 2. You can verify that it comes out to be the first term differentiating with respect to x 1, it comes out to be 2 into x 1. Differentiating with respect to the x 2, it turns out to be 2 into x 2, it is nothing but the scalar multiplication of the vector x 2 into x.
And another continuing these discussions, we also seen one of the operations in the, while we were discussing with the vectors and matrix multiplication is what is called as a quadratic term, where we have a matrix M of the d cross d element, that is a square matrix and we have a vector x with d elements. When you perform the operations of x transpose M into the vector x, so we observed that, it results into what is called as a scalar variable and this term has a 2 x terms are there, we define that as a quadratic term.
Now, if you refer that, when you, if you look into this particular operation, when you perform this derivative of this thing, so we can, there are 2 relations we can think about that. So that is, one of the thing is that, when M is a, M is not a symmetric matrix, that means it is just a simple square matrix, at that time, the differentiation of this quadratic term with respect to the vector x, it turns out to be the sum of the matrix M and the vector particular matrix and multiplied by the vector x. I am not showing how it has been appear, appear, you can verify this by considering the d is equal to 2 in the same way as the previous 2 exercises and you can verify that, it turns out to be this expression, this is the derivative of the, this quadratic term with respect to x, that is when the matrix M is a, is not a symmetric matrix.
When M is a symmetric matrix, what is symmetric matrix? Basically, the octagonal elements of a matrix are same, right. So, you can recall that. Now, when the symmetric, it becomes a symmetric matrix, then the differentiation of this quadratic equation, quadratic term with respect to the
Page | 13
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
vector x, it turns out to be 2 times the matrix M into the vector x. One can verify this by considering d is equal to 2, ok.
So, basically what we have seen now is the differentiation of the function of multiple variables. It turns out that the function of multiple variables is nothing but the function of the vectors, ok. When you perform the differentiation of a vector, it turns out to be, it is a vector of the partial derivative of the function with respect to each of the individual elements of that particular vector. Basically, it gives the gradient of a surface at that point x vector in, with respect to the, all the directions of that particular vector x, alright.
So, this is what we have seen that, and different operations of, operation which resembles the function of the multiple variables, ok, and when you perform the differentiation of that, ok, what, what it going to give, that is what we have seen on these things, ok. So, later we are going to see that this play, all these things play a very important role in designing some of the machine learning algorithms.
Video 3: Differentiation: Vector Valued Functions
Now what you are going to see is something beyond that, it is actually vector-valued function, where we are going to see that function itself is a vector. So let us see that what is the value thing. Let us consider that I am still working with a vector of function of test. So I have the vector of d input variables we are having there. Now let us consider here, so far what I saw, what we saw is a one function has been applied onto this vectors. Now instead of one function, I will be having a k different functions, they will be applying onto the same vector x. So this is the scenario which we will be seeing there.
That means that when I apply a function onto the vector x, it gives an outcome as some kind of a scalar variable y. So now like that, when I am having the k number of such functions applied onto that, each one resulting into a scalar variable y1, y2 up to yk. So that means that I am having a vector of functions, I will be having there. And that is exactly the things I am modifying over here. So now my function I am representing is, observe this notation here, when my function f which I represented earlier is with the italics and the non-bold notation, that is indicating it is a kind of a scalar. That means the resultant function gives an outcome of the scalar variable.
Now you can see here is that now it is a vector of functions, that means function of vectors. That means here the f which I see here is a bold face and a non-italic, that is indicating that it is a function, it is not just a single function, it is a vector of functions. So that is what has been resulting here, you can see here is that it is a vector of functions applying onto the same vector x. So this vector of functions is actually called as the vector-valued functions.
And this, in a function notation, if you look into, if you define any of the systems like this, many of the machine learning algorithms, they falls under this vector-valued functions or system of the vector-valued functions. That means, suppose I have a system where I am having the d number
Page | 14
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
of input variables are associated to that, this forms a vector. Now this particular function is not giving a single output variable, rather it is going to give me a k number of outputs and each function output is a one function of my same input variable x. That is where you can see that my system is a vector of functions which does this.
So this is what is the scenario in order to see that. Later, when you are dealing with respect to the, good example for this is what is called as the neural network, later when you discuss about the neural network, it will be having the multiple inputs and then multiple outputs will be there and the entire neural network system acts as some kind of a vector-valued functions. So this is the scenario and what we are interesting here is that when we are dealing with a system of the vector-valued functions and if you perform the differentiation on these vector-valued functions, what will going to happen.
So that is where we are going to look into that. Before getting into that, so just to understand what are all the things which leads to what is called as the system of vector-valued functions. So one of the things is that, so if you recall when we are dealing with respect to vectors and the operations of the vectors, we dealt with one of the function what is called as the multiplying a vector with respect to a matrix, where a vector x is of the vector of d elements and then matrix m is a square matrix of d cross d matrix.
And we did what is called as the matrix multiplication of this matrix with respect to vector x. And if you recall that when we did that matrix multiplication, this with respect to a vector, we observed that the resultant will be a vector itself. So, basically when that d cross d matrix were obtained and then multiplied, what we obtained is a vector of d elements. And if you observe, if you recall that each of the variables of the output vector is a linear combination of the input vector itself, that is how we have seen here. And how many such linear equations were there? There are d such linear equations were there and each linear equation is a one function of the input vector itself. This is one of the example what we have seen here.
In this particular case, each function is a vector of the function and this function is a linear function what we saw there. And this particular system is what is called as a kind of a linear transformation of what we have saw earlier. So, this is actually a system of linear equations what we see here. So, input is a d input variable, output is a d output variables are there and each is a linear function f1, f2 up to fd. And just a slight variation to this, suppose my matrix which I am multiplying, the transformation matrix what I am using there, it need not be always a square matrix, it can be any rectangular matrix with k number of rows and d number of elements, k cross d elements.
Now, when I multiply this vector of the dimension d to this matrix of k cross d matrix, what we get is a, again the resultant is a vector y, but the number of elements in the vector y will be only the k number of elements. This results into k such linear functions, each linear function is of the function of the input vector itself. So, here each of the linear functions or the number of linear
Page | 15
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
functions depends upon the number of k, number of rows of the matrix m. This is the linear transformation of the system of the vector valued functions where the relation with your input and output is in a linear form itself.
Now, at another example if you consider here, let us consider the number of input variables is d is equal to 2, vector x is represented with the x 1 and x 2. Let f 1 of x, let f 1 be the first function which is applied on to this vector, let that be 2 x 1 square plus d x 2 plus 5. Let us take the another function f 2 which is when it is applied on to that 4 x 1 square plus 3 x 1 x 2 plus 6 x 2 square plus 4 x 2 plus 5 and another function f 3 which is applied on to this which results into an expression called as the 4 x 1 cube plus 9 x 1 square plus 6 x 2 square minus 5 x 1 x 2 plus 2.
So if you look into this, each function is a function of multiple variables and if you look into the each terms, what is highest term in each of the function is that either is a quadratic or is a, that means that each of the function is no longer a linear function, each of the function is a, is actually a non-linear function of the order of the degree 2 or 3. So here if I put together each of these functions, it gives me a vector of functions, this is nothing but the, what is called as the vector value function. This is a typical example where for the given 2 inputs, whatever the output I am getting is the 3 output variables are there and each relation of my, each of the output variable is non-linearly related with your its input, this is the kind of a system.
So this each function here is a non-linear function, altogether what I am trying to represent here is that in general each function in my vector, each function in the vector function is either a linear function or a non-linear function. Why I am emphasising on this thing is that later you are going to see that when we are dealing with the neural networks especially, so you are going to see that the neural network represents this kind of a vector valued, system of vector valued functions where the outputs are non-linearly related with the inputs. Similarly when we are dealing with the various other machine learning topics like either the linear regressions or the non-linear regressions or anyway, there the outputs, the non-linearly related with, linearly or non-linearly related with the inputs. So this is what forms what is called the vector valued functions.
Now what is important for us is, how do we perform the, when we perform the, not how do we, when we perform the differentiation operations on these vector valued functions, what it results into. Now we can slowly relate to this, when a function is a single valued function, when a derivative has been applied over there, it results into a scalar variable itself. When we have differentiated the function of a multiple variables or the function of a vector, it results into a graded vector which is a vector itself. Now when we are performing the differentiation of the vector valued functions where each element of a, each function is a vector by itself, it is a vector of functions itself, then this results into what is called as the matrix basically.
Altogether by looking into all these expressions, basically what I am trying to emphasise here is that the, in general, each function in my vector of functions is either a linear function or a non-linear function. So later we are going to see with respect to the neural network or any other
Page | 16
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
techniques, machine learning techniques we are going to see there, there are many such functions, many such systems we are going to see there, so where they fall under this system of the vector valued functions.
So now what is important for us now is that how do we perform the derivative of this vector valued functions or when we perform the differentiation on this vector valued function, what it results in. Now if you can relate to what all the things we have done so far, so when you perform the differentiation on the function of a single variable, we observe that differentiation leads to a single scalar delimit. And when you perform the differentiation on the function of a vector, it resulted into a vector of the derivatives, basically it is a gradient vector. Now you can see here that now I will be doing the differentiation on the vector of functions, later you are going to see that it leads to what is called as a matrix.
Let us try to understand how it happens there. And so here I have a vector x with d number of input variables and I have k number of functions which are applying on the same vector x that leads to vector valued function f of x. Remember here it is a, my function is my vector form now, it is a bold f indicating that it is a vector of functions it is, how many functions, it is a k functions are there. Now when I perform the derivative of this vector valued function with respect to x, now what happens is that, now we can relate here is that, now we will be performing the derivative with respect to the individual functions of the vector. Now when we know that derivative of the individual function of a vector is nothing but a, it is a partial derivative of the vector or the function with respect to the each of the elements of that particular vector that leads to a vector itself.
So that is what you can see here. So when I perform a derivative of a vector valued function with respect to x, so it leads to kind of a matrix where each row of a matrix is nothing but the transpose of the derivative of the function, first element of a matrix is nothing but, first element of a matrix is nothing but or first row of the matrix is nothing but the derivative of the first function with respect to the vector x. The second row will be the derivative of the second function with respect to the vector like that the last row will be the derivative of the last function with respect to the x. We know that the derivative of a function of vectors with respect to x leads to what is called as a column vector. So in order to become a row vector of that, we will be performing a transpose of that particular vector.
So that's exactly the reason why it becomes a row element of that resulting matrix. Now each row is the transpose of the gradient vector of the first function. The second row is the transpose of the gradient vector of the second function and the last row is the gradient vector of the last function. So that is what is called as the derivative of the vector valued functions. So in general, the derivative of the vector valued function, it results into a matrix of size k cross d and such a matrix of the derivatives is called as the Jacobian matrix. Here the j is silent, it's called as the Jacobian matrix.
Page | 17
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
So basically, the Jacobian matrix is nothing but it is obtained by given a set of function of x. Now compute the derivative of each of the functions with respect to x and the resultant gradient vector corresponding to each of the function is put as a row in the matrix and the number of rows in the matrix corresponds to the number of functions what we have and all of these put together to form a matrix of the size k cross d. So this is nothing but the Jacobian matrix. So basically, the derivative of the vector valued function results into a Jacobian matrix.
As an example, let us consider the example where the number of elements in a vector is 2. Let us consider the same three functions which we have seen earlier to define this vector valued functions. Each function is a non-linear function associated to that. Now in order to compute the Jacobian matrix, what we do is first compute the derivative of the first function f1 of x. When you do the derivative of the first function, what results into that is basically the partial derivative of the function with respect to the x1 and x2 which results into what is called as the gradient vector for x1 and x2 associated to this first function.
Now consider the derivative of the second function f2 of x. So when you consider the derivative of the second function, when you perform the partial derivative of the function with respect to the x1 and x2 which results into the gradient vectors having the elements. So the first indicating that it is the 8x1 plus 3x2 and the second partial derivative with respect to the x2 which leads to 3x1 into 12x2 plus 4. Now the derivative with respect to the third function f3, it turns out to be this vector. You can verify that.
Now put together all of them. So if you see that with respect to the derivative of each one of the functions are nothing but these column vectors what we are getting here. Now with respect to the definition of the Jacobian matrix here, so the derivative of a vector valued functions, now every element of that matrix will be the transpose of the derivative of the first function that is transpose of the 4x1, this turns out to be the 4x1 and the 3x2 as the first row of this matrix and similarly the second row and the third row which is obtained as a transpose of the respective gradient vectors of the individual, the derivative of the individual functions and this matrix all together is what is called as the Jacobian matrix with respect to this example.
Now another example, this is a very interesting example what we have seen just now. So this is where earlier we saw that multiplying a matrix with respect to the x, matrix M is a square matrix what we saw earlier. So this for example, let us consider that the b is equal to 2, the x having the 2 elements and then the square matrix of M with nothing but the 2 cross 2 matrix, so these are the elements of the matrix M. Now when you perform the multiplication between the matrix M with respect to the x, we saw that it results into the 2 equations, a linear equation f1 of x and f2 of x and this is the vector valued function here.
Now when I perform the differentiation of this vector valued function, so basically what I will do, I will do the differentiation of the first function with respect to x and then differentiation of the second function with respect to x. When I do the differentiation of the first function with respect
Page | 18
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
to x, so which is nothing but the partial derivative of this function with respect to x1 and partial derivative with respect to the vector x2, so this results into a gradient vector of m1 m2, m11 and m12. Then similarly derivative of the second function f2 of x with respect to the vector x, it resulted into the gradient vector of m21 and m22, you can verify this.
Now when I put together to form a Jacobian matrix, so these two are the derivative of the function f1 and function f2, now they forms a column of the, forms the row of resulting Jacobian matrix, so this results into what is called as, when you transpose this, it becomes m11 and m12 on the first row and then m21 and m22 on the second row. If you put together as a matrix, it is nothing but the matrix M itself. So basically when the differentiation of the function, which is the product of matrix M with respect to x, which results into the same matrix M itself as a derivative. And this, in the context of this, this matrix M is a Jacobian matrix here. This is what we are talking about the derivative of the vector valued function.
As I mentioned earlier, this plays a very important role in understanding the neural network as a system of vector valued functions and most of the operations or the learning operations happens in the neural network is by performing the differentiation on these vector valued functions. And this operation what we have discussed now will come handy when we discuss at the later stage about the neural network and various other fascinating topics.
Video 4: Unconstrained Optimisation
We discussed about the differentiation operation.
Now the real use of the differentiation operation in the context of the machine learning is coming here. So the part of that, what we're going to see now, some of the optimisation. So as I mentioned earlier, the most of the, at most 90-99% of the algorithms in the machine learning and deep learning algorithm, they form, do some kind of an optimisation operations in order to learn the parameters.
So in order to do this, as I mentioned that the differentiation is the key operation which were used in this optimisation problem. So now in the next two sessions, we look into what is called as the optimisation problem. So in that first, we'll look into what is called as unconstrained optimisation problem and how the concept of differentiation, what we have seen as a part of the calculus, how it will be applicable there and then how that has been used. So that's where we are heading towards.
Now when it comes to the unconstrained optimisation, basically optimisation is such a problem where given a function, we wanted to, it can take its function of a variable, it can take any value for the variable, but we wanted to have that value for which this function will give you a kind of an optimal value. When I say optimal, it is like a minimum value or the maximum. So in that, the unconstrained optimisation means, it's a mathematical process that finds the optimum value of a function. When it finds it, it will not have any restrictions on the variable, so on the values what
Page | 19
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
that variables can take. So that is the situation, that is the kind of a process is called as the unconstrained optimisation.
When I say that finding the optimum value of a function means, finding either a minimum value or a maximum value of a function. So for the simplicity, let us consider the function, it's as a function of a single variable. Then later we'll extend this to the function of multiple variables.
Now in the context of the function of multiple variables, that f of x is a function, my unconstrained optimisation problem is involving finding the optimal value for my x, that means x star, I'm indicating x star as an optimum value, such that for that x star value, the function f of x will give an optimal value. So it can be either a maximum or a minimum value, depending upon what is the function f of x corresponds to.
Mathematically, if we are interested in finding the optimum value as a minimum value, then the unconstrained optimisation problem is formulated as maximising the function f of x for all the values of x that it can take, to get what is called as the optimum value x naught. That means finding that optimum value for which the f of x is a minimum. This is what is the formulation of testing.
And interestingly, when we find this optimum value x star, now any function, when now the function on that f of optimum value x star, so that value will always be a smaller value when I compute the same function for the various other functions, other values of x. So that is the thing. Similarly, if my optimum value is a minimum, we saw is a minimum, so suppose the optimum value is maximum, then the unconstrained optimisation is formulated as finding the x star that maximises the function f of x for all the values of x.
That means when the x star is computed, then for any value of x other than x star, so this function on that any other values, they are smaller than the function of x star. That means the value of a function for that x star will always be larger than the value of the function on the values which are other than the x star. So that is what is the optimisation problem or the maximisation problem.
So in this cases, we do not have any constraint on the values the optimum value can take, of the x can take. That is why it is a unconstrained optimisation. Things will be much clearer later when we discuss about what is a constrained optimisation problem.
So in order to perform this unconstrained optimisation problem, there are many methods that is available. So out of that, so one of the most prominent method is what is called is the gradient method. The moment I say the gradient method, it is nothing but what I what we see earlier is the differentiation on the function. In the gradient method, the condition for optimality is that the gradient of the function f of x should be equal to 0. You know that the gradient of a function is nothing but the differentiation of the function with respect to x. And if that equal to 0 happens, then that is what is the condition for the optimality.
Page | 20
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
That means what it indicates is that the gradient of a vector or the gradient of a function, whenever there is a gradient of a function is 0, then the value of x which is responsible for that will be the either a minimum value or the maximum value. In general, it is an optimum value. So we know that the gradient of a function is nothing but the slope of the curve or the surface at x. And that slope becoming 0 is the condition for optimality. So that means that the value of x for which the gradient is 0, which corresponds to either a maximum or minimum.
Now if you recall in the previous slides, when I was talking about the differentiation operation and its geometrical meaning as the gradient, I shown with an example that for some value of x, when you saw that the gradient was 0. Now that is the implication that comes here. So when a gradient is 0 and for which value that gradient is 0, which corresponds to an optimum value, that is what we do in the unconstrained optimisation.
In other words, given a function, if I want to find an optimal value for that function, simply do the gradient, compute the gradient, that is nothing but the first order derivative and then equate it to 0. So in a nutshell, the optimal value x star is obtained by computing the derivative of the function f of x with respect to x and making that equal to 0 and then solve for that particular x, which gives you the optimum value.
So now the question arises, how do we know that the optimum that we get is either a minimum or a maximum? If you know the domain knowledge and if you know that you are doing a maximisation operation or the minimisation operation, then it's okay. But we do not know whether we are doing the maximisation operation or the minimisation operation. I just have a function of x. Now if I do this unconstrained optimisation, whatever the optimal value I'm going to get, is it corresponding to the minimum value or the maximum value? How do we know that? That's the question.
This is where the second order derivative comes into picture. So basically, you compute the second order derivative of the function and observe its outcome. When you do the second order derivative, you either get an outcome as a constant value or an expression as a function of x. Then for that second order derivative, now you know that by doing the first order derivative, you know that what is the and equating to 0, we know that what value of x it is optimum. Now take that x star, this is the optimum value and then substituting the second order derivative.
If the sign of the second order derivative is positive, then that x star, for which the f of x star we are getting is a minima. If the second order derivative is negative, then the f of x star will be maximum. So when the second order derivative is positive, then what we are doing the optimisation problem, it indicates that you are doing a maximisation problem. When the second order derivative is negative, then it's indicating that the optimisation what we are doing is a maximisation.
Page | 21
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
So most importantly, since there's no constraint on the values the x star can take, so this entire optimisation problem we call it as an unconstrained optimisation problem.
Okay, just to understand this with an example, let us revisit the same example what we have seen when we're discussing with respect to the the first order derivative with respect to a single variable. Let us take the same example f of x is equal to x squared minus 4 x plus 3.
Now if you look into the visualise this particular function, okay, then you know that it's a kind of a value you are seeing here, and at the end of the value there should be a small value, that there will be a minimum value this function can take. And this indicates that after visualising this particular function, I can say that, okay, if I want to find an optimal value, there should be a minimum value I'm looking for it. Okay, that is what now.
So here the optimisation problem will be finding the value of x star for which the f of x is a minimum. What is f of x? It's x squared minus 4 x plus 3 is a minimum. Okay, so as we discussed now, now if I compute the first order derivative of this function d of f of x with respect to the x and equate it to 0, then what will happen? What is the first order derivative for this? It will be 2 x minus 4, okay, and I equate it to 0 and I solve for the x. When I solve for this x, so this 2 x minus 4 becomes 2 x is equal to 4. When I'm moving this 4 to this side now, then solve for this x becomes 2. Right, when x becomes 2, that means that this is my the optimal value.
When x value is equal to 2, then the function f of x will be a minimum value. Okay, if you recall what we shown earlier also that, so when this has happened, when x star x value is 2, we saw that the gradient has become 0. What we have done here, we basically when the gradient and equating to 0, that means that when you solve for this, means that when x is equal to 2, this gradient or the first order derivative going to be 0. Okay, that is what is the meaning. That's what is the same thing which we were establishing again when we manually we saw in the earlier slides. Right, that means that among all the values of x, okay, when among all the values that x can take, the function f of x is having the minimum value when x is equal to 2.
Okay, so when x is equal to 2, the gradient of this function is 0. Right, that means the slope gradient indicating the slope is 0. Right, so now just to justify our concept, when I take the second order derivative of the function f of x, what will happen? So the first order derivative is 2x minus 4 and its derivative again, it is the, it becomes the 2. What is this 2? What is the sign of this second order derivative? It is positive. When the sign of the derivative is positive, means what is that? Basically at x is equal to 2, the function is minimum. The operation which we have done is the minimiser. So that is the justification. All right, this is what we have established like this.
Right, similarly let us take the another example which we have seen earlier. This is the minus x squared minus 4 x plus 2. The geometrically when we plot this function for the different values of x, when we saw that, it is actually it's a kind of a curve where we will be looking for the value,
Page | 22
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
optimal value for x, that is x star, such for which the function f of x, that is minus x squared minus 4 x plus 3 is maximum. Okay, we are trying to do the maximisation operation.
Okay, now with respect to this, when we do the conditional for optimality, when I compute the differentiation of this function f of x and equate it to 0, what I get is minus 2x minus 4 is equal to 0. When I solve for this, what happens? Minus 2x is equal to 4, when I move minus is equal to 4, and then x is equal to 4 by 2, it's a minus 2, it becomes a minus 2. Okay, now what it establishes is that when x is equal to minus 2, my gradient will be 0. That means that optimum value for x which I am looking for is minus 2. That is what we have established.
So when x is equal to minus 2, my gradient is equal to 0. That's what we've seen earlier also, when manually we see that by doing the optimisation problem, what we obtained is that at x is equal to minus 2, this function f of x is taking the maximum value. Right, now like earlier, so if you want to establish a second order derivative with respect to this particular function, if you look into the second order derivative of my first order derivative here, so what I get is a minus 2, which is a negative value. When the second order derivative is negative, that indicating that at x is equal to 2, the function is having a maximum value. Basically, we are doing a maximisation problem. Okay, so this is what we are calling it as an unconstrained optimisation.
Basically, revisiting the same concept what we had discussed with respect to the first order derivative in the earlier slide and unrelating that, that helps us understanding a very important concept which is called as unconstrained optimisation. Basically, to get the optimal value for my function.
All right, and as I mentioned earlier, so this constrained optimisation problem has a very important role in formulating the algorithms for the machine learning and deep learning techniques. Okay, so this unconstrained optimisation what we seen in these two examples is for the function of single input variable, but in general it can be extended into the function of multiple variables also.
So, when I say the function of multiple variables, this is nothing but the function of the vectors. Okay, now here we suppose x is a vector of the variables. So, now the unconstrained optimisation on the function of multiple variables or the function of the vectors is nothing but computing performing a or finding a optimum value for my x vector that is the star itself. Okay, such that it either maximises or minimises that is what is the thing.
All right, so now the optimal value when I am looking into x star that means that I wanted to get the optimum value for each of the elements of my vector that is what is the important aspect. Okay, so that is obtained by computing the derivative of the function f of x with respect to the x and solving and equating to 0 that is a condition for optimality and then solving for the x. What do you mean by the differentiation derivative of the function of vectors with respect to x that is nothing but the computing the partial derivative of the function with respect to the each of the
Page | 23
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
variables and when I compute the partial derivative of each of the variable I will be equating to 0 that is the condition for optimality for that.
That means the differentiation of partial derivative of the vector x with respect to the first variable x1 and equate it to 0 then the second partial derivative of the function with respect to the second variable and then equate it to 0 like that we will be doing for all the function of this with respect to xd and equate it to 0. That means that when you do this partial derivative of the function with respect to the vector x okay it will be equating to the 0 vector okay and that is what we are trying to do there okay so basically most importantly here we are not putting any constraints on the value of the x star that can take okay that is why it is a unconstrained optimisation problem all right so this is all about the unconstrained optimisation problem okay.
So as I was keep on mentioning that this optimisation has a very important role in the machine learning most of the machine learning techniques that involved in either the maximisation or the minimisation of these functions in the context of the machine learning such a function which we will be minimising it or maximising it in order to obtain the optimum value so we call such a function as an objective function okay later we're going to see depending upon the different techniques these objective functions it may be either acts as a cost function or the error function or a criteria function or a likelihood function okay whichever the functions which comes with respect to the different techniques okay so later when we are dealing with respect to the machine learning and deep learning techniques we'll be looking each one of those things at later stages.
So basically I am pointing out that the objective function in the machine learning techniques which we are trying to minimise so they mostly they are using it for our optimisation problem one such of the optimisation which we will be doing is a constrained optimum unconstrained optimisation okay so all together we just looked into one of the optimisation technique which is what is called as the unconstrained optimisation technique where we are interested in finding the optimal value for a function where we're not putting any restrictions on the values this optimal value can take all right so later we'll look into the another optimisation problem it's called as the constrained optimisation plot.
Video 5: Constrained Optimisation
Now let us look into the what is called as the constrained optimisation problem. So unlike the unconstrained optimisation problem, the name itself suggests that there is some constraint will be applied or to the optimal value the variable can. So the constrained optimisation it's basically like unconstrained optimisation problem. It's a process of optimising the objective function with respect to some variable. When I say some variable it comes along with the presence of some constraints on this variable. That is what is called as the constrained optimisation.
Page | 24
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
So let us generalise this. Let x be a vector of d variables and general constrained optimisation problem can be written as. So we need to optimise this function f of x where f of x is called as the objective function here which we wanted to optimise it. When I say optimisation it is either I am minimising the objective function or the maximising the objective function and such that there will be some constraint on these variables would be. So if you look into this here that g i of x h j of x and p k of x these are all the constraints.
So first one the g i of x is having there are n 1 number of constraints each i indicating one constraints. Such n 1 such elements are there. So the constraint on the input variable there are n 1 number of such constraints are there. This is actually it's called as equality constraint because this function constraint function is equal to 0. Similarly h j there are n 2 number of constraints here. This is greater than 0 and the p k there are k number of such constraints which are less than 0. This greater than 0 or less than 0 this functions they are called as inequality constraints. So these are the equality constraints or inequality constraints that needs to be satisfied here all right.
So this is general form I have given here. So when you look into the real problems okay so these constraints it is not it is need not be compulsory that all these three kind of a constraints should be present. Sometimes we have only the equality constraint sometimes we have only the inequality constraint that too be greater than equal greater than 0 constraints or less than 0 constraint. Sometimes multiple such equality constraints multiple such inequality constraints may be possible okay. Altogether in nutshell what I am saying is that we are optimising a function in the presence of some constraints on the things. The constraints can be a of the form equality constraints on inequality constraints. Any number of constraints can be possible in the unconstrained optimisation problem.
Now so in order to solve this constrained optimisation problem so basically what we need to do is that first given a problem first you need to identify which function that needs to be optimised. Basically to identify the objective function that needs to be optimised and then identify the constraints on which this the variables are defined and once they know the what is the objective function and then once you know the constraints are acting on them then you solve it to get the best solution that satisfies these constraints okay. So this is the typical steps are used for solving this optimisation constrained optimisation .
So like unconstrained optimisation problem here also there are many methods to solve this unconstrained optimisation problem. One of the most popular methods is the Lagrangian. This Lagrangian multiplier method basically it works by converting this constrained optimisation problem into an unconstrained optimisation problem using what is called as the Lagrangian multiplier. So for suppose we have some number of constraints there will be a one Lagrangian multiplier for each of the constraints that would be there and then using that it converts the unconstrained optimisation problem to a sorry constrained optimisation problem into an
Page | 25
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
unconstrained optimisation problem then it solves for it. So that is how the constrained optimisation problems are solved.
Now if you look into the how this Lagrangian multiplier method is works let in order to understand that let us try to understand this with respect to the function of a single input variable this basically for the simplicity case we are doing for this the same thing can be extended to the multiple variables also or the function of vectors also okay. So let f of x be a function of single input variable okay now the steps involved in this Lagrangian multiplier method for solving the constrained optimisation is that first is the we need to optimise the primal objective function. So in the context of the Lagrangian multiplier form the objective function with which we begin with is called as the primal objective function.
So basically we like what we discussed earlier so we try to optimise that particular function f of x okay such that some constraints g of x is equal to 0 or h of x is greater than 0 or b of x is less than 0 so this is a simplicity I am using here. So here the function f of x here it is called as the primary objective function that needs to be minimised under the presence of this constraint okay this is the problem with which we start with. So then we need to formulate the Lagrangian objective function basically formulating Lagrangian objective function means converting this constrained optimisation problem into an unconstrained optimal.
So typically what we do here is that now all the constraints will be made as a secondary objective function and these secondary objective functions are either added or subtracted to the primary objective function f of x okay and that's how it converts the unconstrained optimisation problem into an unconstrained one. When it when the secondary objective function nothing but the constraints have been added or subtracted to that and each of these constraints will be multiplied with some weights of the coefficients and such coefficients are called as the Lagrangian multipliers.
As an example for this thing so here f of x is my primary objective function so when I converting that into the Lagrangian objective form now it will be f of x minus the alpha times the g of x g of x is the equality constraints and you are also seeing the minus the beta times the h of x that is the greater than zero that's the inequality constraint plus the gamma times the p of x. Now when you are seeing here some constraints are added some constraints are subtracted the rule is here is that so when the constraint is equality constraint or the inequality constraints that's true we saw that so when the constraints are greater than zero or the equality equal to zero in that situation the constraints are considered as a secondary objective function and they would be subtracted from the primary objective function that's why the g of x is equal to zero that's why it is a minus the g of x is we are considering that similarly the h of x is greater than zero that's why that constraint will be also be subtracted whenever the constraint is less than zero then that particular constraint would be added to the primary objective function in order to convert it into a unconstrained optimisation .
Page | 26
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
Now we can observe here is that coefficient alpha is multiplied with this that's similarly beta is multiplied with h of x and then gamma is multiplied with the p of x okay these alpha beta and gamma they act as a what is called as the coefficients they are called as the Lagrangian multipliers okay they give some sort of a weightage to each of those constraints in the the Lagrangian objective function okay now my Lagrangian objective function has the what are the unknowns here one is the primary variable for which the optimum value is considered that is the x x x and then we also have the alpha beta and gamma they are the Lagrangian coefficient that also for which we get the optimum value in this so this is the formulation of that now once we formulate the unconstrained optimisation into the unconstrained optimisation now we know that how to solve the unconstrained optimisation problem how do we solve this unconstrained constrained optimisation problem now simply take the first order derivative of the objective function and equate it to zero and solve for the ambition so here what is the objective function now it's a Lagrangian objective function now the differentiation of the Lagrangian objective function with respect to the x and equate it to zero and solve for the x we get a optimality condition equation of the now once we get this solve for the x okay now we what we next step is to obtain the dual objective function that means this condition of our optimality what we are getting here so that will be substituted in the equation of the Lagrangian objective function which we saw in the previous step in the step two okay and which reserves into a new function which is a purely a function of only the Lagrangian multiplier all right.
So that means this objective function we call this a dual objective function and this is a function of only the the Lagrangian objective or Lagrangian multipliers so so once we get the dual objective function which is a function of the Lagrangian multipliers so what we do in the next step is is that we will be optimising this dual objective function basically when you do this optimising this dual objective function what we get is the optimal values for my the Lagrangian multipliers alpha beta and gamma so remember here i just use only the alpha beta gamma with respect to the three constraints what we are having here so if you have any more number of constraints there will be more number of Lagrangian multipliers that we okay that needs to be kept to now once we get in optimal values for this Lagrangian multipliers here so we substitute this objective this optimal values of this Lagrangian multipliers in the condition for optimality condition here and then when we solve for that we get an optimal value for the primary variable x star so these are the steps that are involved in the Lagrangian multiplier method for solving the constraint output.
So one important note you need to keep in mind here is that when the primary objective function primal objective function when we started with with respect to this Lagrangian multiplier method if we are doing the minimisation operation in the the primal objective function when it comes to the dual objective function we will be doing the maximisation or if you are starting with the primal objective function we are doing the maximisation operation
Page | 27
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
then the dual objective function would be minimised okay this is the uh this is the kind of a rule it has to be followed so now let us try to understand this with respect to an example so let us take the function of single input variable itself so let that function be half into c times the x squared where c is some constant so here the optimisation problem is to find the value for x star that is optimal value for x for which the function f of x is minimum with the constraint that ax minus b is less than 0.
Now if you look into this particular problem here my objective function is half times the cx square which is nothing but my primary objective function so okay and this formulation is what is called as the primal objective function in the context of the Lagrangian multiplier method and since having the constraint only the ax minus b less than zero this inequality constraint is the single constraint that i basically i need to come up with the value for x that is x star for which this function is minimised so such that this constraint is satisfied okay so now the here the Lagrangian objective function for this will be so since we are having a single constraint here that to the less than zero so this constraint will act as a secondary objective function and it will be added by multiplying the Lagrangian multiplier alpha to that okay this is weighted by a in the Lagrangian multiplier alpha so this is alpha times this okay this plus is coming because of the less than okay this is my Lagrangian objective function let that be equation one.
And here the condition for optimality will be differentiating this Lagrangian objective function with respect to x and then equate it to zero so when we are differentiating and then equating to zero so the you can verify that we can get in when we solve for the x we get an equation for x as a minus alpha into a divided by c this is what we get an equation for x then as for the things what we do is that we will substitute this equation two in the equation one and then when you substitute that when you solve for that you can verify that later that we can get an expression which is of the form like this so now if you look into this particular function this is a function of the Lagrangian variable this is my dual objective function okay.
Now if you pay attention to that what we have done in the primal form is that we have basically what we see what you have done in the primal form is that we have minimised this primal objective function so now when it comes to the dual objective function we will be maximising that dual objective function so what is the condition for optimality we take this dual objective function and compute the differentiation with respect to the lambda and equate it to zero so when you do this so basically when you do the differentiation of this so what we get is the the equation for the lambda as the minus p c by a square so you can verify this when you do the differentiation operation we get this optimal value this is the optimal value for the lambda.
Now as per the steps now i'll apply substitute this equation three in the equation two itself that is the condition for this optimality and when you solve for that we get an optimal expression for my the optimal value x okay as a b by a so that means that whenever the x takes the value p by a then that objective function will be minimised or objective function will going to get the
Page | 28
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
minimum value under the constraint that uh a x minus b is always less than zero okay this is what is the this is how we solve the constraint optimisation problem.
Just to further understand this let us take this in this objective this function so let us take c is equal to 1 and a is equal to minus 2 and b is equal to 3 by this my objective function that f of x will be basically half into x square and then constraint will be basically it is minus 2 x minus b less than 0. Let us try to understand this with respect to a function itself for the different values of x so this function 1 by 2 x square is a completely a parabola what you can see here then for the all those different values of x now the constraint minus 2 x minus 3 this is a linear equation the line that can be formed like this.
So now we can see that suppose this constraint is not there then what will be this equation is basically a value what you are having here and when are we going to get a minimum value for x if you do the second order derivative for the partial derivative of this thing so you get that the partial derivative of 1 by 2 x squared by dou x okay this is to what is called as the 2 x now if when you going to expect that this is going to take a minimum value so basically when x is equal to 0 then this d of x by dou x so this is the gradient is equal to 0 so when this is equal to 0 then this is where you can expect that there is a when x is equal to 0 you can expect that there is a minimum value okay that is when we do not have any constraint okay.
Now what is the constraint says the constraint is says that so i have a equation or the line minus 2 x minus 3 okay so that constraint that should be satisfied is that it should be less than 0 okay that means that with respect to this constraint i need to find the minimum value which satisfies this constraint also so that is what i wanted to do that that means that if you really see here okay suppose x is equal to 0 if i substitute x is equal to 0 into this particular equation here so what will happen that when x is equal to 0 what will happen it becomes minus 2 minus 3 which is equal to minus 5 it is still less than 0 x is equal to 0 this also satisfies but is the x is equal to 0 is the minimum value which satisfying this constraint this actually no because if you really see here if you look into this particular point here so that means that when the x is equal to minus 1.5 when x is equal to minus 1.5 then also this particular constraint is still less than or equal to 0 what happens to this minus 1.5 minus 2 into minus 1.5 minus 3 it is equal to 0 this is exactly equal to 0 that means that this is a point where it cuts this particular function right.
So now beyond this if the values of if it is less than minus 1.5 then what happens to this particular value of g of x g of x becomes suppose if it is a minus 2 then it becomes minus 2 into minus 2 that becomes 4 minus 4 minus 3 that becomes a minus 1 that means that it is plus this plus minus 2 if it is a minus 2 minus 3 then it becomes minus of minus this plus 4 and this becomes 1 okay so that means that it violates for any value which is less than minus 1.5 okay this constraint will be violated it is no longer less than or equal to 0 right so that means that equal to 0 right so that means that so minus 1.5 will be my the optimal value that needs to be there so how does this constraint optimisation going to help me in finding that that means that so here
Page | 29
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
if you really see this is my constraint this optimal value i am obtained by the constraint optimisation problem which is nothing but the b by a what is b b is 3 and a is minus 2 which is nothing but minus 1.5 right so that means that when x is taking the value minus 1.5 then this objective function will have the minimum value which also satisfies this constant so whatever the things i represented here it shows that any value of x which is less than minus 1.5 this constraint will not be satisfied but for any value which is x star value is greater than or equal to minus 1.5 then this constraint minus 2 x minus 3 less than 0 is satisfied that means that in order to satisfy this under this limitation of the function then whatever the minimum value this function going to take is for the value minus 1.5 for which it going to take the minimum value okay.
So that is the the implication what we are seeing as a part of this constraint optimisation so that is where you can see here is that you can really look into that so now only if you ignore this particular part here so now if you see that so for all these values of x greater than this it is satisfying a constraint okay less than this it is not satisfying the constraints all right so now whatever what i am trying to see so for whatever the value it satisfies this constraint okay here whatever the minimum value what you're going to get for this particular function is at x is equal to minus 1.5 okay that is the meaning of it so that is what is if that constraint is not there then the minimum value would have been at the x value of x is equal to 0 but since because of this constraint has to be satisfied now under this constraint the minimum value of this function take with by satisfying this constraint is x is equal to minus 1.5.
So this is what is called as the constraint optimisation this concludes our discussions on the basics of mathematics that too on the basics of the calculus basically what we saw is the very important aspects from the perspective of the machine learning and deep learning we started with what is differentiation and what is the differentiation of indicates basically it indicates the gradient of the surface its implication of the gradient in terms of the constrained optimisation and the unconstrained optimisation we have seen that we also generalise this with respect to the differentiation of the vector of functions and also the function of vectors okay and at the end we also seen the implication of this differentiation informing the constrained optimisation and also the unconstrained optimisation is solved using the Lagrangian multipliers okay so so as i already mentioned this all these operations play a very important role in understanding various learning techniques in the different machine learning algorithms okay later.
we're going to come across with these techniques when we come across into the various machine learning techniques when these topics comes I expect that you should be well versed with these techniques and then you can relate the concept what we studied right now with respect to the those concepts all right.