“Role of Mathematics in Machine Learning”
Shweta Lamba1, a), Preeti Saini2, b) and Vinay Kukreja3, c), Bhanu Sharma4, d)
1,2,3,4( Chitkara University Institute of Engineering and Technology, Chitkara University, Punjab, India)
a)shweta.lamba@chitkara.edu.in
b)Preeti.saini@chitkara.edu.in
c) Corresponding author: vinay.kukreja@chitkara.edu.in
d)Bhanu.sharma@chitkara.edu.in
Abstract.
Context: Machine learning is forming an algorithm that proposes a model that can learn from data and do predictions. It is used to know why something works and why one model is better than another. Machine learning is a built-in mathematical prerequisite. Machine learning is powered by a combination of statistics, calculus, linear algebra, and probability.
Objective: This paper aims to examine the mathematics behind machine learning.
Method: Different digital repositories are searched for research articles. Studies that are most relevant to the objective of the paper are selected for analysis.
Result: Selected studies show that machine learning models are designed to perform calculation operations like matrix manipulation of the data for which linear algebra is used. The concept of probability is the dominant framework for dealing with uncertainty. Learning algorithms use the concept of probability to create an analysis on a given training dataset for creative prediction. Machine learning is intrinsically data-driven. The initial data acquired from different sources is in the form of junks, to search out the right data, statistical analysis is performed. Calculus helps to find the direction of change. In which direction should the unknown variable be changed such that the prediction is more optimal with minimum error?
Conclusion: Findings of this paper are that the mathematical rules of designing models of machine learning are based on concepts of linear algebra, calculus, statistics, and probability. Statistics is widely used for the estimation of the value of a population parameter. Calculus tells us how to learn and optimize models. Linear algebra ensures the feasibility of algorithms to run on massive data sets. Probability predicts the likelihood of the occurrence of an event.
Keywords. mathematics of machine learning, statistics, calculus, linear algebra, probability.
INTRODUCTION
There are various tasks and problems in the world that are very hard to solve through programming computers, traditional methods, and explicit instructions. Making computer games, iPhone apps or desktop applications are very doable through normal means whereas making a machine that can beat the best human in a complex game, making a car that can drive itself where having a computer recognize objects are not so simple. These are not the things for which computers can be easily commanded to do. The world is filled with data generated by people, computers, phones, and other devices in the form of pictures, music, words, spreadsheets, videos and it doesn’t look like it’s going to slow down anytime soon. Humans analyze data and adopt a system to analyze the chance in the data pattern but the surplus amount of data and ever-increasing nature makes it cumbersome to do it manually. One way around this is to teach the computer how to learn and to figure out how to get better through lots of practice, this is machine learning (ML). The efficient use of high-performance computing architectures, unmatchable prediction capability, and productive usage of statistical tools for information extraction are the factors making ML the first choice for the scientific computing community. ML algorithms can use hypotheses based on mathematical models involving calculus and statistics, probability, correlation, regression.ML brings the promise of deriving meaning from all data. ML is a combination of tools and technologies that can be utilized to answer questions to data. ML helps different e-commerce companies suggesting relevant products for their customers. It is used to read handwritten addresses when you send a letter. It’s used to figure out whether an email is a spam or not. It’s used to D monetize one's favorite videos across the entire platform. To make it possible we need to combine it with math with a lot of programming [1].
MATHEMATICAL MODEL OF A SYSTEM
Building a mathematical model of a system is to identify and describe the various cause and effect relationships between the system parameters, decision variable, and state variables and to define and evaluate the system Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3833931
performance. To determine the system parameters is a part of the formulation of a model of the system. The events of the model of the system are artificially generated using the decision variables and system parameters and as an effect changes in the state-variables are recorded and the system performance criterion is estimated.
MACHINE LEARNING PROCESS
ML has allowed PC frameworks beginning resources to learn without being modified expressly. ML has granted entirely new knacks in the field of detection, estimation, prediction, and classification [13-17]. In the goalmouth of training an ML model is to create a model that answer’s the best to the objective question pretty much all the time. FIGURE 1 illustrates the major phases followed for proposing a model for a particular problem via ML [2]. Training on an ML model needs to first bring together the data, apropos of the model is to be trained. Hence the first step of ML is gathering quality data. As the quality and the quantity directly determines the effectiveness of the model. At times the data prerequisites adjustments and manipulations like normalization, duplication, and error correction. For this, the data preparation is performed which includes loading and processing data to make it suitable to use in the model. Processed data is then fragmented into two parts, one major part is for training and the other is for performance evaluation. The next step is model selection in which all the algorithms are considered which well suited the type of problem. Then model training amplifies the prediction endowment of the model using training data. Then testing data is used for evaluation through the proposed model.
FIGURE 1. Machine Learning Process.
STEP 1: Data collection
A large amount of data, relevant to the problem to be solved, is collected by different methods and techniques. Then this data is tabulated. The quality and quantity of data gathered has a direct relation with the model’s accuracy or turn out.
STEP 2: Data preparation
In this step, the data-set is stacked and processed for use in the ML model. The data must be split into two segments. The first big segment is utilized in preparing the model and the subsequent for the assessment of the model prepared. There present diverse pre-preparing and clamour evacuation calculations that guarantee the great nature of information by expelling commotion from the example information
STEP 3: ML model selection
There exist many ML algorithms or approaches for the generation of a model. The selection of a particular approach depends on the applicability of the model. Different models give different accuracy rates according to the application for which it is used. Select the appropriate model suitable for those particular problems.
STEP 4: Train the Model In this step, the ML model is trained to bypass training data to the model in repeated cycles. In each cycle, training data is passed to the model, and prediction of the model is compared with the results. As in training data, results are already provided, the model learns how to do predictions. STEP 5: Prediction
This is the point where the value of ML is realized. Here proposed model is used to predict the outcome of what it should be.
STEP 6: Evaluation Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3833931
It tests the model against the data never used in the training process and illustrate the model’s performance. The testing informational index is utilized to anticipate the exactness of the model proposed.
MATHEMATICS USED IN ML
ML proposes different models implementing different algorithms for detection, prediction, and classification. The prediction could be what an object in a picture looks like or what the next price for fuel might be in a certain country or what’s the best combination of drugs to cure a certain disease might be. ML is a built-in mathematical prerequisite. It is used to know why something works or why one model is better than another. FIGURE 2 shows the components of maths used in ML. ML is powered by a combination of statistics, calculus, linear algebra, and probability [3].
FIGURE 2. Components of maths in ML
Statistics is the core of everything [4]. It has been widely used for the estimation of the value of a population parameter. Calculus tells how to make a model learn and how a model can be optimized. Linear algebra makes running these algorithms feasible on enormous data sets [5]. Probability assistance prediction of event occurrence.
TABLE 1. Data-set used to create a model of apartment cost estimator concerning the area of the apartment
Price Per Square Foot
Price Of Apartment
85
534760
65
535717
70
833333
15
728377
95
899945
80
914339
60
403601
55
437328
100
480232
Let us consider a problem to predict the price of an apartment in terms of the area of the apartment. Considering a data-set, shown in TABLE 1, having 2 columns, one is the price per square foot of a given apartment and the other is the total price of the apartment. This is the only marker to predict the price of the apartment as a whole. Here present some kind of correlation in the data set. The predictive model gives an idea about the correlation between dependent and independent variables which ultimately improves the capability of a model to predict the price of the apartment as a whole provided the price per square foot.
The graph shown in Fig. 3, has x-axis measuring the price per square foot and the y-axis measuring the price of the house. It is a scattered plot. Ideally, a line can be found that intersects as many data points as possible. This line can be used for prediction. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3833931
FIGURE 3. Graph showing the correlation between Price per square foot and Price of the apartment.
In mathematics, the field of statistics acts as a collection of technologies that extracts useful information from data. It’s a tool for creating an understanding from a set of numbers. Statistical inference is a process of predicting a larger population of data based on a smaller sample. In statistics, we try to create a line so we use a statistical inference technique called linear regression. This allows us to summarize and study the relationalship of dependent and independent variables. The way linear regression is represented is by using an equation:
y=mx + b (1)
Where y is the prediction (dependent variable) based on the input variable x (independent variable). The point of intersection of the line with y-axis is represented by ’b’ and, ‘m’ the slope, defines the relativeness of variables. So the value of y can be predicted using the value of x provided value of m and b is already known. The naive way to find the value of m and b is to try out a bunch of different values. To check the correctness of these values error functions are used. Error function tells how far off the actual value is from the predicted value. These are lots of different types of statistical error functions, least-squares one of them.
Calculus is the study of change. It helps to find the direction of change. In which direction should the unknown variable change such that the prediction is more optimal and the error is smaller? It got an optimization technique called gradient descent that will help to discover the minimum value iteratively. It uses the error for a given data point to compute the gradient of an unknown variable and the gradient can be used to update two variables. Then move on to the next point and repeat the process over and over again till the minimum value is found. If multiple variables are considered then that is called multi-variant regression. The branch of maths that consult to the multivariate spaces and the linear transformation between them is called linear algebra. It provides a set of operations that can be performed on groups of numbers known as matrices. Now the data set consists of M by I matrices, where’ samples have ’I’ features. Each variable has a weight. Probability is the measure of the likelihood of something. Here the data does not consist of values but it is classified in different categories or classes. Logistic regression is a probability technique that can be used to find the probability of occurrence rather than predicting a value. Since the probability goes between o and 100, a threshold is chosen past that point it is more likely to have more probability. This gives an S-shaped curve by a sigmoid function. Optimizing this function will plug in input data and get a probability class value.
TABLE 2. Different probability tools used in the generation of the predictive model
Probability Tool
Use In Model
Maximum likelihood
Decision making in training
log loss and cross-entropy
Model fitness
Receiver Operating Characteristic curve, or ROC curve
Model evaluation
Bayesian optimization
Configure hyper-parameters
PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS Probability is the Bedrock of ML as ML is used to propose different predictive models for uncertain data. Uncertainty of data resides in the imperfection, noise, and incompleteness in covering the domain of prediction problems. There are different probability tools to manage uncertainty in data. The classification model predicts the membership of the same in a class. Probability is used to design different learning algorithms like Naïve Bayes Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3833931
[6] and Bayesian Networks [7]. TABLE 2 shows the different probability tools and their use in model generation. Probability frameworks are used in training the model, evaluating the fitness of a model, and hyper parameters configuration.
The statistics tool is an assortment of apparatuses that help to change perceptions into data and to respond to inquiries concerning tests of perceptions. All great ML depends on factual learning. [8] Utilized distinctive factual strategies like regression [9] and survival analysis, or ML models for performing malignancy hazard and repeat forecast. FIGURE 4 shows the Kaplan–Meier curve to picture and decipher the consequences of endurance models. This graph also discriminates patients at high risk and low risk.
FIGURE 4. Kaplan–Meier curve for the predictive model
The graph is between time duration and low-risk, high-risk values. Here, life is recurrence-free. The predictive model predicts low-risk and high-risk for each patient. [10] Scalable anomaly detection engine can be implemented by the measurement of statistical correlation. FIGURE 5 specifies the steps used in Dynamic Bayesian Networks (DBN) for finding the relationship between different components based on time.
FIGURE 5. Steps to generate the DBN using symbolic dynamic filtering.
CALCULUS Calculus includes all gears for analysis of the association amid capacities and their information sources. Regularly, in AI, we are attempting to discover the sources of info that empower a capacity to best match the information. Neural systems are one of the most well-known and fruitful reasonable structures in AI. They are developed from Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3833931
an associated snare of neurons and enlivened by the structure of natural minds. The conduct of every neuron is affected by a lot of control boundaries, every one of which should be streamlined to best fit the information. The multivariate chain rule can be utilized to ascertain the impact of every boundary of the systems, permit them to be refreshed during preparation. Multivariate math required to construct numerous normal AI procedures. A wide variety of data sets derived from devices such as biochip transponders on farm animals, automobiles with built-in sensors, smart homes, smart cities, or airplanes with sensors, heart monitoring implants, and electric clams in coastal waters. Efficient ML algorithms for such data sets can use hypotheses based on mathematical models involving both calculus and statistics. These devices or sensors used inside physical, biological, or environmental systems collect large volumes of data that follow mathematical models based on both calculus and statistics. Calculus can be used to implement learning from patterns. Various combinations of states and control are used by the ML model for analysis [11], [12].
CONCLUSION Prerequisite of ML is Statistics, Calculus, Linear Algebra, and Probability. Statistics is a branch of mathematics that is related to data. It is used to infer information from a given data-set. It can also be used to understand the relationship between data, visualize the data, or plot the information inferred from the data. Calculus is used to detect the change concerning time. It is used for the pattern variation in data and algorithm optimization. Linear Algebra is used to mathematically perform the regression. It runs all kinds of algorithms on various types of data-sets. Probability predicts the likelihood of an event occurrence.
REFERENCES
1. Srinivas Pyda, Srinivas Kareenhalli, “Mathematics and Machine Learning, International Conference on Mathematics and Computing”, 2018, pp. 135-153
2. Karamitsos, Ioannis and Albarhami, Saeed and Apostolopoulos, Charalampos,” Applying Develops Practices of Continuous Automation for Machine Learning”, Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, vol 11, 2020, pp 363
3. Sanjeev Arora, “Mathematics of Machine Learning: An Introduction”, Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematics, 2019, pp. 377_390.
4. Md. Kosher, “A combination of Mathematics, Statistics, and Machine Learning to Detect Fraud, National Mathematics Conference”, Bangladesh, 2020.
5. Gennady Grabarnik, Luiza Kim-Tyan, Serge Yaskolko, “Addressing Prerrequisited for STEM Classes Using an Example of Linear Algebra for a Course in Machine Learning”, The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning, 2020, pp. 21_26
6. Somya Goel, Sanjana Rosshan, Rishabh Tyagi, Sakshi Agarwal, “Augur Justice: A Supervised Machine Learning to predict Outcomes of Divorce court cases”, Fifth International Conference on Image Information Processing”, 2019, pp. 280-285.
7. Kevin Fong-Rey Liu, Jia-Shen Chen,” Prediction and assessment of student learning outcomes in calculus A decision support of integrating data mining and Bayesian belief networks”, 3rd International Conference on Computer Research and Development,2011, IEEE.
8. Aaron N. Richter,b,⁎, Taghi M. Khoshgoftaar, “A review of statistical and machine learning methods for modeling cancer risk using structured clinical data”, Artificial Intelligence In Medicine, vol 90, 2018, pp. 1_14
9. Zhenru Wang, Tijie Shi, “ Prediction of the Admission Lines of College Entrance Examination based on machine learning”, 2nd IEEE International Conference on Computer and Communications”, 2016, pp. 332-335
10. Azmoodeh, A. Dehghantanha, M. Conti, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Detecting crypto-ransomware in IoT networks based on energy consumption footprint”, J. Ambient Intell. Humanized Comput., vol. 9, no. 4, 2018, pp. 1141_1152.
11. N. Milosevic, A. Dehghantanha, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Machine learning aided Android malware classi_cation”, Comput. Elect. Eng. , vol. 61, 2017, pp. 266_274
12. Mohan S Acharya, Asfia Armaan, Aneeta S Antony, “A Comparison of Regression Models for Prediction of Graduate Admissions”, Second International Conference on Computational Intelligence in Data Science, 2019, IEEE.
13. Sankhwar, S., Gupta, D., Ramya, K.C. et al. Improved grey wolf optimization-based feature subset selection with fuzzy neural classifier for financial crisis prediction. Soft Comput 24, 101–110 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-019-04323-6 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3833931
14. Le, DN., Parvathy, V.S., Gupta, D. et al. IoT enabled depthwise separable convolution neural network with deep support vector machine for COVID-19 diagnosis and classification. Int. J. Mach. Learn. & Cyber. (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/s13042-020-01248-7
15. Anupama, C.S.S., Sivaram, M., Lydia, E.L. et al. Synergic deep learning model–based automated detection and classification of brain intracranial hemorrhage images in wearable networks. Pers Ubiquit Comput (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-020-01492-2
16. Shankar, K., Sait, A. R. W., Gupta, D., Lakshmanaprabu, S. K., Khanna, A., & Pandey, H. M. (2020). Automated detection and classification of fundus diabetic retinopathy images using synergic deep learning model. Pattern Recognition Letters, 133, 210-216.
17. Ghosh, S., Rana, A. and Kansal, V., “A Statistical Comparison for Evaluating the Effectiveness of Linear and Nonlinear Manifold Detection Techniques for Software Defect Prediction” International Journal of Advanced Intelligence Paradigms (IJAIP), 12(3/4), pp 370-391, ISSN 1755-0394, Inderscience, DOI 10.1504/IJAIP.2019.098578, 2019 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3833931