Recent and Upcoming Developments in
Randomized Numerical Linear Algebra for Machine Learning
Michał Derezi´nski* Michael W. Mahoney†
June 21, 2024
Abstract
Large matrices arise in many machine learning and data analysis applications, including as representations of datasets,
graphs, model weights, and first and second-order derivatives. Randomized Numerical Linear Algebra (RandNLA) is
an area which uses randomness to develop improved algorithms for ubiquitous matrix problems. The area has reached
a certain level of maturity; but recent hardware trends, efforts to incorporate RandNLA algorithms into core numerical
libraries, and advances in machine learning, statistics, and random matrix theory, have lead to new theoretical and
practical challenges. This article provides a self-contained overview of RandNLA, in light of these developments.
1 Introduction
Matrices provide a natural structure with which to model data. For example, a matrix A ∈ Rm×n can encode information
about m objects, each of which is described by n features. Alternatively, a positive definite matrix A ∈ Rn×n can
encode correlations/similarities between all pairs of n objects. Motivated by large-scale data problems, recent years
have witnessed many exciting developments in the theory and practice of matrix algorithms. Particularly remarkable is
the use of randomization. Historically, in statistics, machine learning (ML), and domain sciences, randomization has
been assumed to be a property of the input data, e.g., due to noise in the data generation mechanisms. In this more
recent work on randomization, it is used as an algorithmic or computational resource.
Randomized Numerical Linear Algebra (RandNLA) is an interdisciplinary research area that exploits randomization
as a computational resource to develop improved algorithms for large-scale linear algebra problems. From a foundational
perspective, it has roots in theoretical computer science (TCS), deep connections with convex analysis, probability
theory, and metric embedding theory, etc., as well as strong connections with scientific computing, signal processing,
and numerical linear algebra (NLA). From an implementational perspective, well-engineered RandNLA algorithms beat
highly-optimized software libraries for ubiquitous problems such as very over-determined least-squares, they scale well
to parallel/distributed environments, and they beat state-of-the-art for a wide range of low-rank matrix approximation
problems. From a data analysis perspective, RandNLA has strong connections with ML and statistics and many
“non-methodological” applications of data analysis. More generally, of course, it is of continued importance since there
is a growing interest in providing an algorithmic and statistical foundation for modern large-scale data analysis.
The area of RandNLA has achieved a certain level of maturity. As such, there are multiple reviews of the area
from multiple different perspectives: introductory overviews (light on prerequisites) [67, 68]; broad and proof-heavy
resources [171, 167, 126]; perspectives on interdisciplinary theory (light on proofs) [124, 54]; deep investigations
of specific disciplinary topics [94, 104, 131, 132]; and approaches to high-quality software implementations [138].
Particularly notable is the current effort of incorporating RandNLA algorithms into the core numerical libraries (e.g.,
RandLAPACK and RandBLAS; see [138]) that lie at the foundation of virtually all computational tools in ML (and
scientific computing and beyond).
This level of maturity, as well as recent demands by the ML community and recent trends in hardware, lead to
new theoretical and practical challenges that did not exist a decade ago. For example: developing RandLAPACK and
*University of Michigan (derezin@umich.edu)
†ICSI, LBNL, and University of California, Berkeley (mmahoney@stat.berkeley.edu)
1
arXiv:2406.11151v2 [cs.LG] 19 Jun 2024
RandBLAS leads to new algorithmic and theoretical abstractions, different than those present in TCS or NLA, and
different than those common in statistics and ML; recent developments in neural network training highlight important
trade-offs between communication and computation, between forward accuracy and parameter stability, etc.; and recent
developments in hardware have led to new trade-offs between latency and throughput, both at the model training and
model inference stage. To complement these challenges, recent theoretical developments in Random Matrix Theory
(RMT) have provided finer quantitative performance analysis than was possible with traditional RandNLA analysis tools.
These theoretical developments come from RMT as well as from RandNLA itself, and they permit both finer analysis
of existing methods as well as the possibility to develop novel methods that better bridge the theory-practice gap.
In this survey, we will provide a self-contained review/overview of RandNLA, in light of these recent developments,
describing and highlighting upcoming and future trends. We will introduce the foundations of RandNLA and matrix
sketching, with a particular focus on applications in ML and stochastic optimization, followed by an overview of recent
developments in using sketching methods to gain stronger control on the convergence and generalization properties of
stochastic algorithms. We will cover both the theoretical aspects of these techniques, as well as their applications in the
context of important ML and data science research topics. Thus, our discussion will be relevant not only to theoretical
researchers who wish to learn the latest advances in RandNLA, but also to a general audience of ML and data science
researchers and practitioners, who want to incorporate RandNLA methods into their large-scale data problems.
2 Foundations of “Classical” RandNLA
In this section, we will describe the foundations of RandNLA theory, at least up until a few years ago. The basic idea
is to construct a sketch (either data-aware or more commonly data-oblivious) that has parameters chosen basically
to preserve the geometry of an entire low-dimensional subspace. This sketch can be interpreted in one of several
complementary ways; and it can be used in one of several complementary ways. Understanding the details of these
complementary approaches is crucial for understanding recent advances and upcoming developments in RandNLA for
modern ML.
2.1 Matrix Multiplication
A core primitive in RandNLA is that of approximating the product of two matrices [66]. The basic problem is the
following: given an m × n matrix A and an n × q matrix B, approximate the product A · B. A key conceptual insight
is that this problem can be expressed as approximating the sum of n rank-one matrices:
A · B =
Xn
k=1

A∗k

 ·
􀀀
Bk∗

.
Given this, a natural (random sampling) algorithm suggests itself:
1: Fix a set of probabilities pi, i = 1, . . . , n, summing up to 1.
2: for t = 1, . . . , s do
3: Set jt = i according to P[jt = i] = pi.
4: end for (Randomly pick s terms of the sum according to the pi’s.)
5: Approximate AB by summing the s terms, after scaling.
If we let S be an s × n matrix whose tth row (t = 1, ..., s) has one non-zero, St,jt = 1/
√
spjt , then we can use a
“sampling matrix” formalism [66] (a type of “sketching operator”) to express this as:
AB ≈
1
s
Xs
t=1
1
pjt
ajtb⊤
jt = (AS⊤) · (SB) = C · R,
where ajt and b⊤
jt are corresponding columns of A and rows of B. Now, if we use probabilities pi ∝ ∥ai∥2∥bi∥2
2
(row-norm sampling [66]), then we can minimize a very natural Frobenius norm error:
E [∥AB − CR∥F ] = E[∥AB − (AS⊤)(SB)∥F ] ≤
1
√
s
∥A∥F ∥B∥F . (1)
Here, by setting s = 1/ϵ2, we obtain a Frobenius norm error that is bounded above by ϵ, in the additive scale defined by
∥A∥F ∥B∥F .
This Frobenius norm bound given in (1) is used in many places in RandNLA. However, “better” spectral norm
bounds of the form ∥AB − CR∥2 ≤ ϵ∥A∥2∥B∥2 are possible (after adjusting the sample size s; see [39]) via matrix
versions of Chernoff/Bernstein concentration inequalities [167].
Within RandNLA, the main “use case” for approximate matrix multiplication arises when it is applied not directly to
the matrices themselves, but rather to the “subspaces” that they define, giving rise to subspace embeddings [124, 171].
Definition 1 Let A be an n × d matrix, and let U consist of orthonormal columns that are the basis of the column
subspace of A. Then, an s × n matrix S is a subspace embedding for A if
∥U⊤U − (SU)⊤ SU∥2 = ∥I − (SU)⊤ SU∥2 ≤ ϵ.
Here, for a sampling matrix S, the “correct” sampling probabilities pi to use are proportional to the squared row norms
∥Ui∗∥22
, a.k.a. the leverage scores of A. These are expensive to compute exactly, but they are fast to approximate—
explicitly or implicitly—in one of many ways [71, 2, 37, 148, 135].
Subspace embeddings are an extremely important concept in Classical RandNLA theory. They were introduced and
first used implicitly in RandNLA by [72, 73], who relied on leverage score sampling [71], which can be viewed as a
type of data-aware sketching. The first explicit definition of subspace embeddings was given by [164, 69], who focused
on data-oblivious sketching; and these data-oblivious methods were popularized by [171]. Many constructions (random
sampling and projection methods, deterministic constructions, hashing functions, etc.) satisfy this condition [171].
There are several complementary interpretations of a subspace embedding. Within NLA, it is an acute perturbation
[165], meaning in particular that distances and angles are perturbed, but rank is not lost. Within TCS, it is a Euclidean
space analogue of Johnson-Lindenstrauss (JL) lemma [133], meaning in particular that distances are approximately
preserved for the infinite number of points on a unit ball in the low-dimensional space. More generally, the subspace
embedding guarantee can be used to produce a spectral approximation of the matrix product A⊤A, in terms of the
Loewner ordering of positive semi-definite (PSD) matrices, which provides a strong control on all the associated
eigenvectors and eigenvalues. To be more precise, let A be an m × n matrix and ϵ ∈ [0, 1/2]. If matrix S is an ϵ/2
subspace embedding for the subspace defined by A; then A⊤S⊤SA is a spectral approximation of A⊤A, i.e.,
1
1 + ϵ
A⊤A ⪯ A⊤S⊤SA ⪯ (1 + ϵ)A⊤A, (2)
where ⪯ denotes the PSD Loewner ordering. (We use A⊤S⊤SA ≈ϵ A⊤A as a shorthand for (2) throughout.) The
property A⊤S⊤SA ≈ϵ A⊤A implies that any ith eigenvalue of the sketch A⊤S⊤SA is an ϵ approximation of the
corresponding eigenvalue of the data matrix A⊤A (and similarly for the singular values of SA). It also extends to the
control of various matrix functions of A⊤A, including the inverse, i.e., (A⊤S⊤SA)−1 ≈ϵ (A⊤A)−1, square root, trace,
quadratic form, and more.
This subspace embedding property is a “must must have” for the worst-case style of analysis provided by TCS. For
everyone else, it provides a guiding principle, but (strictly speaking) it’s optional. For example, if one is interested in
providing good numerical implementations, then losing rank can still give a good preconditioner [9, 10]; and if one is
interested in statistics and ML, then losing rank introduces a bit of bias that can be compensated for by greatly reducing
variance [121, 153, 122]. This leads to a theory-practice gap. As we will describe in Sec. 3, this is the key technical
place where Classical RandNLA theory and Modern RandNLA theory differ, and why recent developments in Modern
RandNLA theory open up the door for so many other use cases and applications of RandNLA ideas.
2.2 Least-squares Approximation
We can use ideas from Sec. 2.1 for RandNLA methods for approximate matrix multiplication as a foundation to develop
RandNLA methods for least-squares (LS) regression. Given m × n matrix A and m-dimensional vector b, the basic LS
3
problem is to solve
x∗ = argmin
x∈Rn
∥Ax − b∥2.
If m ≫ n, then the problem is called overdetermined or overconstrained; and if m ≪ n, then the problem is called
underdetermined or underconstrained (or, especially in ML, overparameterized). In the overdetermined case, one
can compute the solution in O(mn2) time (in RAM model), e.g., with normal equations, QR decompositions, or the
Singular Value Decomposition (SVD). RandNLA gives faster algorithms for this ubiquitous problem, which is at the
root of most other advances (in particular, work on low-rank matrix approximation, as well as extensions to optimization
problems, etc.) in the area.
Importantly, depending on the domain, “faster” can mean one of several different things: within TCS, “faster” is in
terms of low-precision asymptotic worst-case theory; within NLA, “faster” is in terms of high-precision wall-clock time;
and in large-scale implementations, one can compute (in Spark/MPI/etc.) low, medium, and high precision solutions on
up to terabyte-sized data, and here “faster” depends mostly on communication.
Meta-algorithm for LS regression. Here is a meta-algorithm for solving LS regression problems with RandNLA
methods.
1: Randomly sample a small number of constraints according to A’s leverage score sampling probabilities {pi}mi=1.
2: Solve the LS regression problem on the resulting subproblem.
A naïve version of this meta-algorithm is not promising: it gives a 1 + ϵ relative-error approximation (since it
approximates the solution using only a subset of constraints), that fails with probability δ (comparable to flipping a fair
coin “heads,” say, 30 times in a row), in roughly O(mn2) time, i.e., as long as the exact deterministic method (since, as
stated, it computes the leverage scores exactly).
On the other hand, a non-naïve version of this meta-algorithm is very promising: it gives the best worst-case
algorithm in RAM [164, 69, 71] (using Sketch-and-Solve, described below); it beats LAPACK for high precision
in wall-clock time [157, 9, 134] (using Sketch-and-Precondition, described below); it leads to super-terabyte-scale
implementations in parallel/distributed environments [174, 85]; and it gives the foundation for low-rank approximations
and the rest of RandNLA [72, 73, 124, 68].
Fundamental structural result. For LS approximation, here is the fundamental structural result that is at the heart
of RandNLA-based methods [69, 124]. (This is a deterministic result that holds for any matrix S, and it is central to
RandNLA theory by choosing S to be an appropriate sketching operator.) Consider the “sketched” LS approximation
problem:
˜x = argmin
x∈Rn
∥S(Ax − b)∥2,
where S is any matrix. If S satisfies the two basic conditions:
1) σ2
min(SUA) ≥ 1/
√
2 and 2) ∥U⊤
AS⊤Sb⊥∥2 ≤
p
ϵ/2 ∥Ax∗ − b∥2,
where b⊥ = b − UAU⊤
AA and UA is the orthonormal basis of A, then:
∥A˜x − b∥2 ≤ (1 + ϵ)∥Ax∗ − b∥2.
Importantly, each of the two basic conditions can be viewed as approximate matrix-matrix multiplication [124, 68].
RandNLA provides a plethora of sketching methods (random sampling and projection methods, deterministic
constructions, hashing functions, etc.) for S so as to satisfy these two basic conditions. As described in the many
reviews of RandNLA, the choice of which method one uses typically depends on one’s goals: to provide TCS-style
worst-case theory; to provide NLA-style implementations; to use in large-scale and/or ML settings; etc.
Three algorithmic paradigms for LS and other RandNLA methods. If we want to use RandNLA methods more
generally, then there are three general paradigms—that apply both to LS methods as well as more broadly than LS (e.g.,
to low-rank matrix approximation).
1. Sketch-and-Solve: Here [164, 69, 71], we randomly construct a smaller LS problem, and then solve it using a
traditional NLA method. This is the simplest approach to highlight the structure of RandNLA theory; it is most
convenient for TCS-style theory; and it leads to low-precision estimates, e.g., ϵ = 0.1.
4
Runtime
TCS
ML
NLA
Generalization error
Machine precision error
Precision
Sketch-and-Solve
Iterative Sketching
Sketch-and-Precondition
Figure 1: Schematic of three algorithmic paradigms for the use of RandNLA methods: “Classical” (subspace embedding
based) RandNLA theory is most appropriate for low precision (with Sketch-and-Solve) and high precision (with Sketchand-
Precondition); while “Modern” (RMT-based) RandNLA theory is well-suited for moderate precision (with Iterative
Sketching), which is of increasing interest in modern ML applications.
2. Iterative Sketching: Here [91, 151, 175], we repeatedly sketch/sub-sample the problem randomly, and then
iteratively refine the estimate using a convex optimization method. This includes Preconditioned Weighted SGD,
Sketch-and-Project, and Newton Sketch; it is the most convenient for ML-style stochastic optimization; and it
leads to moderate precision estimates, e.g., ϵ = 10−3.
3. Sketch-and-Precondition: Here [157, 9, 134], we randomly construct an equivalent but well-conditioned problem,
and then solve it using a traditional deterministic NLA iterative method. This is the best (usually) for high-quality
numerical solutions; it is most convenient for NLA-style implementations; and it leads to high-precision solutions,
e.g., ϵ = 10−10.
See Fig. 1 for an illustration of these three algorithmic paradigms. The first and the third have received the greatest
amount of attention within RandNLA, in part due to the (TCS and NLA based) style of theory used in Classical
RandNLA. The new theoretical developments in Modern RandNLA (described in Sec. 3) are particularly well-suited to
the second (and for ML based theory).
2.3 Low-rank approximation
We can use the ideas from Sec. 2.2 to develop RandNLA methods for low-rank (LR) approximation. Many details
change, e.g., for LS problems the matrix is usually tall, while for LR problems both dimensions may be large, in which
case there is a rank parameter. Here, we will highlight the main high-level ideas.
LR matrix approximation via the SVD. Let A denote an m× n data matrix (for simplicity, suppose that m ≥ n), and
let Q ∈ Rm×k denote an “embedding” between the “high” and “low” dimensions; then Aˆ = Q⊤A is a low-dimensional
representation of the data, and A˜ = QQ⊤A is a LR matrix approximation. If A has rank higher than k, then the
truncated SVD give a LR approximation,
A ≈ Ak = UkΣkV ⊤
k ,
composed of the top k singular value-vector pairs, where recall that we order the singular values so that σ1 ≥ σ2 ≥
... ≥ σn. Computing this SVD costs O(mn2) time, for m ≥ n. As for the error of the truncated SVD, we are typically
5
interested in how much “information” is lost in a truncated SVD, i.e., in considering
A − Ak =
X
i>k
σiuiv⊤
i .
For the spectral norm, this is: ∥A − Ak∥2 = σk+1; and for the Frobenius norm, this is: ∥A − Ak∥2
F =
P
i>k σ2
i . For
any unitarily-invariant matrix norm, ∥ · ∥ξ, the matrix Ak provides an optimal rank-k approximation, in the sense that
Ak = argminB : rank(B)=k∥A − B∥ξ.
One can also view the truncated SVD as a projection, in which case it exhibits complementary optimality properties. In
particular, if we let P = UkU⊤
k be the projection onto the span of u1, ..., uk, then we can use that to derive Ak as a
projection of A:
PA = UkU⊤
k A =
Xn
i=1
σiUkU⊤
k uiv⊤
i =
Xk
i=1
σiuiv⊤
i = UkΣkV ⊤
k = Ak.
In this context, the total squared projection error (using P as the projection) over the columns a1, ..., an of A corresponds
to the squared Frobenius norm error of the LR approximation:
Xn
i=1
∥ai − Pai∥22
= ∥A − Ak∥2
F .
These complementary perspectives have been useful in developing RandNLA LR matrix approximation methods.
Column subset selection. There is another problem, the Column subset selection problem (CSSP), that is superficially
different than LR matrix approximation via the SVD, but that has a similar underlying linear algebraic structure. The
problem is to choose a small number of actual columns from an input matrix A [73, 23, 25]. For most objectives of
interest, it is intractable to compute the optimal set of columns. One version of the CSSP is the following: instead of
projecting onto singular vectors, one can select a subset of data points, {ai : i ∈ S} for S ⊆ {1, ..., n}, and project onto
their span (with slight abuse of notation, here S is a subset, while later it is a sketching operator). If we let PS = QQ⊤
be a projection onto the span of {ai : i ∈ S}, where Q is the embedding matrix, then the problem is the following:
Find argminS:|S|=k∥A − PSA∥F .
Even though the CSSP is different than LR matrix approximation via the SVD, and solving this problem does not in
general require computing SVD, the truncated SVD is often used as a baseline quality measure for the CSSP.
Fundamental Structural Result for LR Approximation. For LR matrix approximation, including both via the SVD
and via the CSSP, here is the fundamental structural result that is at the heart of RandNLA-based methods [128]. (As
with the fundamental structural result for LS, this is a deterministic result that holds for any matrix S, and it is central to
RandNLA theory by choosing S to be an appropriate sketching operator.) Given A ∈ Rm×n, let Vk ∈ Rn×k be the
matrix of the top k right singular vectors of A. Let S ∈ Rn×s (s ≥ k) be any matrix s.t. V ⊤
k S has full rank. Then, for
any unitarily invariant norm ξ,
∥A − PASA∥ξ ≤ ∥A − Ak∥ξ + ∥Σk,⊥
􀀀
V ⊤
k,⊥S

(V ⊤
k S)+ ∥ξ. (3)
This result was introduced and first used for the CSSP [23]; and subsequently it has been used for improved random
projections in LR matrix approximations [156, 94], improved Nyström-based LR PSD matrix approximations [86],
improved feature selection methods [22, 24], and improved power iteration and Lanczos based methods [128].
Basic randomized LR approximation algorithm. Let’s go into more detail on how this result is used for random
projection algorithms for LR matrix approximation [94]. Given anm×n matrix A, a target rank k, and an over-sampling
parameter p, the following algorithm outputs rank-(k + p) factors U, Σ, and V , s.t. A ≈ UΣV ⊤.
6
1: Draw an n × (k + p) Gaussian random matrix S.
2: Form the n × (k + p) sample matrix Y = AS.
3: Compute an orthonormal matrix Q s.t. Y = QQ⊤Y .
4: Form the small matrix B = Q⊤A.
5: Factor the small matrix B = ˆU ΣV ⊤.
6: Form U = QˆU .
The use of the Gaussian random matrix S is important here. It is slower in RAM than other fast sketching methods, and
in practice generating Gaussian random bits can be the computational bottleneck. However, in scientific computing, one
often works with structured operators which can be applied quickly to an arbitrary vector [94]. In this case, one can
prove bounds of the form:
∥A − QQ⊤A∥F ≤

1 +
k
p − 1
1/2
∥A − Ak∥F ,
∥A − QQ⊤A∥2 ≤
 
1 +
s
k
p − 1
!
∥A − Ak∥2 +
e
√
k + p
p
∥A − Ak∥F .
These expressions quantify the idea that, w.r.t. the spectral/Frobenius norm error, the computed approximation is as
good as the best LR matrix approximation (provided by the truncated SVD), plus a very little bit of additional error.
Extension of basic randomized LR approximation algorithm. These results can be improved in various ways, and
the analysis typically uses some variant of the fundamental structural result in Eqn. (3). Consider, for example, the
block power iteration scheme:
1: Draw an n × k Gaussian random matrix S.
2: Compute the matrix ˜Uq = orth((AA⊤)qAS) via alternating application of A, A⊤ and orthonormalization.
The basic idea is that ˜Uq converges to the span(Uk), and ˜Uq˜U ⊤
q A gives a good k-rank approx of A. For more detail,
see, e.g., Lemma 4.15 from [171]. For any orthonormal matrix Q ∈ Rm×k, a basic structural result is that
∥A − QQ⊤A∥2 ≤ ∥(AA⊤)qA − QQ⊤(AA⊤)qA∥
1
2q+1
2 .
From this, by choosing q = O(log(n)/ϵ), Q = ˜Uq, and a Gaussian S, we can show that with high probability
∥A − ˜Uq˜U ⊤
q A∥2 ≤ (1 + ϵ) · ∥A − Ak∥2.
The runtime of this method is O(mnkq + nk2q), where mnkq corresponds to O(q) matrix multiplications and nk2q is
O(q) orthonormalizations (in theory, one orthonormalization is enough, but performing orthonormalization after each
multiplication helps numerical stability [94]). This is of interest since it leads to high precision LR approximations in
the spectral norm [94, 171, 139, 65].
3 Foundations of “Modern” RandNLA
In this section, we will describe relatively-recent work that provides a foundation for current and upcoming developments
in RandNLA. One surprising aspect of Classical RandNLA theory, as outlined in Sec. 2, is that there is actually very
little use of randomness. Essentially, all the randomness is “filtered through” the subspace embedding. That is sufficient
for many TCS and NLA style objectives (although with Sketch-and-Solve and Sketch-and-Precondition, the two areas
use that embedding differently), but it is often “overkill” when RandNLA methods are used in broader (statistical, ML,
optimization) pipelines (that typically use some form of Iterative Sketching). This has applications, in particular, in
stochastic optimization and traditional statistical resampling methods, where the JL-style guarantees that come with a
subspace embedding are sufficient but not necessary. Modern RandNLA theory basically asks for a stronger form of
“Algorithmic Gaussianization” than the JL Lemma provides, in the sense that sketches look more Gaussian-like than
what is provided with pair-wise JL-like guarantees. To accomplish this, we must make connections with ideas from
non-asymptotic RMT, which have proven fruitful across data science and ML.
7
3.1 Algorithmic Gaussianization via RMT and LESS Embeddings
To understand the basic issue, let us revisit the subspace embedding, where for an n × d orthogonal matrix U (a column
basis matrix of A) we seek a matrix S ∈ Rs×n such that (SU)⊤SU ≈ϵ U⊤U = I. Here, s must be larger than d; but
how much larger does it need to be?
The proportional regime. Let us consider the extreme case (which is in fact the most common) where s ≈ d to within
a constant factor, and suppose that S is a scaled i.i.d. Gaussian sketching matrix. Thanks to the rotation invariance of
Gaussian distribution, SU is also Gaussian, and so we can obtain (up to lower order terms):
σmin(SU) ≈ 1 −
r
d
s
, σmax(SU) ≈ 1 +
r
d
s
. (4)
This follows from the Marchenko-Pastur (MP) law [12]. Such a Gaussian sketch not only gives us sharp control on
subspace embeddings, but also on most Classical RandNLA tasks, e.g.:
• Sketch-and-Solve: If we solve ˜x = argminx∥S(Ax − b)∥22
, then E∥A(˜x − x∗)∥22
= d
s−d−1∥Ax∗ − b∥22
for
s ≥ d + 2.
• Sketch-and-Precondition: If we construct R−1 from the QR of SA, then cond(AR−1) ≤ 6, with high probability
for s ≥ 2d.
• LR approximation: If we compute Q = orth(AS), then E∥A − QQ⊤A∥2
F ≤
􀀀
1 + k
s−k−1

· ∥A − Ak∥2
F for
s ≥ k + 2.
From these results, traditional RandNLA-style guarantees (summarized in Sec. 2) are straightforward to derive. These
results are all relatively easy to show for i.i.d. Gaussian matrices; and results of this form are common in NLA and
scientific computing applications of RandNLA [94]. The basic question is whether we can obtain similar results with
(faster) non-Gaussian sketches.
Inversion bias. To answer this question, we need a notion of sketch quality (akin to subspace embedding) that can
capture the “Gaussian-like” behavior—in the proportional regime. Working in the proportional regime, where the
aspect ratio of the matrix is constant, is key here—it is much more realistic, and if the aspect ratio is not constant then
JL-like results are straightforward to derive. One way to capture this Gaussian-like behavior is through inversion bias
[52, 80]. The basic idea should be obvious: for a real-valued random variable X, we know that E[X−1] ̸=
􀀀
E[X]
−1.
A similar phenomenon occurs for random sketch matrices, A˜ = SA:
E[(A˜⊤A˜)−1] ̸= (A⊤A)−1, even though E[A˜⊤A˜] = A⊤A. (5)
This bias is especially pronounced in the proportional regime, due to the random singular value fluctuations described
by the MP law.
Why focus on the inverse? Let us for a moment consider a statistical perspective on sketching. Here, the sketched
covariance matrix A⊤S⊤SA can be viewed as a sample covariance estimator of the “population covariance matrix”
A⊤A ∈ Rd×d. A natural question is: how does the spectrum differ between the sample and the population covariance?
RMT answers this by looking at the resolvent matrix:
(A⊤S⊤SA − zI)−1 for z ∈ C \ R+.
The Stieltjes transform (normalized trace of the resolvent, central to RMT) exhibits an inversion bias, leading to a
discrepancy between the sample and population. In traditional RMT, controlling this inversion bias lets us characterize
the limiting eigenvalue distribution as s, n, d → ∞. Recent works [52, 50, 48] have extended this RMT analysis to the
non-asymptotic RandNLA theory, essentially showing that: If we can correct the inversion bias of the sketch A˜ = SA,
then we can recover stronger Gaussian-like sketching performance for faster sketches across RandNLA tasks.
Correcting the bias (for Gaussian sketches). When A˜ = SA is an s × d Gaussian sketch, scaled so that E[A˜⊤A˜] =
A⊤A, then there is a very simple correction for the inversion bias:
E

(γA˜⊤A˜)−1
= (A⊤A)−1 for γ =
s
s − d − 1
.
8
This simple fix does not hold for other (faster) sketching methods that have been used in RandNLA, e.g., Hadamardbased
projections, sub-Gaussian sketches, very sparse sketches, sampling methods, etc. The basic reason is that other
sketches are not perfectly rotationally symmetric. Thus, among other things, they could lose rank (with very small
probability) and/or suffer from “coupon collector” problems. In general, for faster sketching methods, the inversion
bias occurs differently in each direction, and so we cannot correct it with a single dimensional rescaling factor.
Nearly-unbiased sketches. Going beyond Gaussian sketches motivates the notion of a nearly-unbiased estimator [52].
Definition 2 A random PSD matrix ˜ C is an (ϵ, δ)-unbiased estimator of C if there is an event E that holds with
probability 1 − δ such that, when conditioned on E,
EE [ ˜ C] ≈ϵ C and ˜ C ⪯ O(1) · C.
Let S be an s × n random matrix such that
√
s S has i.i.d. O(1)-sub-Gaussian entries with mean zero and unit
variance (i.e., a direct extension of a Gaussian sketch). Building on the Stieltjes transform analysis, it is possible to
show that for this sketching matrix we can nearly correct inversion bias, in the sense that ( s
s−dA⊤S⊤SA)−1 is an
(ϵ, δ)-unbiased estimator of (A⊤A)−1 for ϵ = O(
√
d
s ) and δ = e−cs (Proposition 4 in [52]). In other words, conditioned
on a high probability event E, we have
EE

( s
s−dA⊤S⊤SA)−1
≈ϵ (A⊤A)−1, for ϵ = O
√
d
s

. (6)
Let us compare/contrast this notion of an (ϵ, δ)-unbiased estimator with JL / subspace embeddings in Def. 1. For a
subspace embedding, we have that
Subspace embedding: (A⊤S⊤SA)−1 ≈η (A⊤A)−1, η = Θ
r
d
s

.
Thus, we see that the average-case analysis in (6) is sharper than what is possible to recover with the high-probability
subspace embedding analysis, by at least a
√
s factor.
Averaging RandNLA estimators. Implications of this Modern RMT-style analysis for RandNLA are discussed in
later sections. However, as an immediate consequence, we can establish various “model averaging” schemes for
RandNLA-based estimators, that can be used in statistical/ML/optimization pipelines.
The premise behind model averaging is that if we can produce a bias-corrected estimator ˜x, i.e., Bias2(˜x) ≪ Var(˜x),
then we can boost its accuracy by averaging multiple independent copies of this estimator. When the estimator relies on
some linear functional of the inverse matrix (A⊤S⊤SA)−1, as in sketched LS [80] and a number of other RandNLA
algorithms [48], then this follows (with some small additional effort) from (6). For example, for q independent
sub-Gaussian sketches Si of size s ≥ O(d+q), if we average the LS estimates ˜xi = argminx ∥Si(Ax−b)∥2, then the
aggregate estimator ¯x = 1
q
Pq
i=1 ˜xi satisfies [80]:
E∥A¯x − b∥2 ≤ (1 + ϵ)∥Ax∗ − b∥2, for ϵ = O
 d
qs

.
Extending RMT-style analysis to fast sketching. Compared to classical JL or subspace embedding approaches,
most RMT for sketching requires different “Gaussianization” assumptions and different parameter regimes (e.g., the
proportional regime). Most out-of-the-box theory applies only to (expensive) dense Gaussian or (still expensive) dense
sub-Gaussian sketching matrices. Given the widespread interest in fast sketching methods, a natural question is: Can
we extend this line of work to fast sketches, e.g., sparse or structured?
Several recent results have provided an affirmative answer to this question [63, 109, 52, 43, 34], including: nonasymptotic
RMT-style analysis for sparse sketches based on Leverage Score Sparsification (LESS) [52, 43, 34] and
asymptotic RMT-style analysis for structured sketches based on randomized Hadamard transforms [63, 109]. These
results essentially show that certain fast sketching operators are “close” in a strong enough sense to sub-Gaussian
matrices, typically by relying on two structural conditions which are needed for S to ensure small inversion bias:
9
1. Subspace embedding: this is the standard guarantee from Def. 1; using Modern RMT [26], sharp MP-style
subspace embedding guarantees as in (4) can be recovered for fast sketching operators such as LESS [34].
2. Restricted Bai-Silverstein inequality: this is the key novelty that provides a variance bound for random quadratic
forms [52]; and it is related to the Hanson-Wright inequality [161].
Based on these ideas, we can reduce the cost of applying sub-Gaussian sketches down from O(nds), while still
recovering (6), i.e., we can construct more efficient sketches for which it is possible to correct inversion bias and recover
other Gaussian RandNLA guarantees. For example, given a tall n × d matrix A, we can compute an s × d sketch SA
(LESS embedding) in near-linear time ˜O(nd + sd2) such that ( s
s−dA⊤S⊤SA)−1 is an (ϵ, δ)-unbiased estimator of
(A⊤A)−1 with ϵ = O(
√
d
s ), matching the guarantee for sub-Gaussian sketches (Theorem 8 in [52]).
3.2 RMT for Sampling via DPPs
The astute reader may wonder whether the developments described in Sec. 3.1 that hold for data-oblivious sketching
methods also hold for data-aware sampling methods. After all, they are based on RMT-based sketching in the
proportional regime, and in some sense sampling is inherently “non-RMT.” For example, it involves coordinate axes
and coordinate-aligned subspaces, and lower bounds arise that are due to the Coupon Collector problem. Yet, using
Determinantal Point Processes (DPPs), one can show that very similar RMT results hold for certain data-aware sampling
methods [54].
DPPs form a family of non-i.i.d. sampling distributions with a long history in applied mathematics [123, 20, 19, 98]
that has received interest in ML due to their associations with diversity and volume [108]. In this context, one can define
a DPP for a given n × d matrix A as a probability distribution over the row subsets of A: any subset S ⊆ {1, ..., n} is
assigned a probability
Pr(S) ∝ det(ASA⊤
S), (7)
where AS is the submatrix consisting of the rows of A indexed by S, and det(ASA⊤
S) corresponds precisely to the
squared |S|-dimensional volume spanned by those rows. Such a distribution naturally promotes the row subsets
that capture more “information” about the matrix A, while minimizing the subset size. This translates to guarantees
for Classical RandNLA tasks which match, and sometimes improve on, those based on Gaussian (or Gaussian-like)
sketching. For examples, it has been shown [61, 93, 47] that when S is drawn according to (7) with subset size s, then
it achieves a LR approximation guarantee that matches that of a Gaussian sketch:
E ∥A − QQ⊤A∥2
F ≤

1 +
k
s − k + 1

· ∥A − Ak∥2
F , Q = orth(AS).
This remarkable connection between DPPs and RandNLA has been exploited not only in LR approximation [61, 93, 47],
but also in LS regression [57, 59] and iterative optimization [53, 143, 60], including inversion bias corrections similar
to those that are possible for Gaussian and LESS sketches [57, 44]; see [54] for a detailed discussion. One way to
explain this success is to view DPPs as a natural non-i.i.d. extension of leverage score sampling. Specifically, it can be
shown that the marginal probability of the ith row of A appearing in a DPP sampled set S, i.e., Pr(i ∈ S), corresponds
in a precise sense to the ridge-regularized leverage score of that row [41, 45]. These ridge leverage scores have been
introduced (independently of DPPs) as the right sub-sampling technique for LR approximation and related tasks in a
long series of RandNLA works, e.g., [3, 140, 162].
These ideas have led to (theoretically) fast DPP sampling: from early approaches for exact sampling via eigendecomposition
[98, 107, 84]; through so-called intermediate sampling via leverage scores [41, 45, 30]; to Markov chain
Monte Carlo sampling [6, 4, 5, 7]. Many of these algorithms are available in the Python package DPPy [81].
Nevertheless, there is still an inevitable computational overhead in using non-i.i.d. sampling methods, such as
DPPs, in place of popular i.i.d. sampling techniques such as leverage score and row-norm sampling. This trade-off
is justified when the quality and small size of the target sample is of paramount importance, e.g., in active learning,
Bayesian optimization, clustering, or coreset selection. However, the RMT techniques for analyzing DPPs have also
found applications in developing new guarantees for i.i.d. sampling. In particular, it has been shown recently [60, 49]
10
that after preprocessing matrix A with a randomized Hadamard transform, an i.i.d. uniform sample of O(k log k) rows
with high probability contains a DPP sample of size k. This has unlocked new approaches in using RandNLA sampling
methods for stochastic optimization methods such as Sketch-and-Project (see Sec. 4).
4 Advances in RandNLA for Optimization
In stochastic optimization, the goal is to minimize (or maximize) an objective function, when one or more of the input
parameters is subject to randomness. It arises in many areas, most prominently with stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
based methods for training ML models [21]. Leveraging Modern RandNLA techniques and theory (from Sec. 3) within
the framework of stochastic optimization leads to the Iterative Sketching paradigm (of Fig. 1). This has manifested itself
in many ways, including: PW-SGD [175], a variant of SGD which is preconditioned and weighted using RandNLA
techniques; Subsampled Newton [75, 159, 172] and Newton Sketch [152], which apply the Sketch-and-Solve paradigm
to Hessian estimation; and Sketch-and-Project [91, 56, 60], a modern extension of the classical Kaczmarz method
[103], which uses sketching to achieve implicit preconditioning in stochastic methods. Recent advances in RandNLA
(described in Sec. 3.1) have proven fruitful in obtaining theory for stochastic optimization algorithms based on Iterative
Sketching, which comes with much smaller theory-practice gap compared to traditional approaches.
Consider the following standard finite-sum optimization task:
Minimize f(x) =
1
n
Xn
i=1
ψi(x), (8)
where x is a parameter (or weight) vector, and where each ψi(x) corresponds to the loss for a single data point. In
optimization, we generally approach this problem by iteratively refining a sequence of estimates x0, x1, x2, ..., relying
on local information about the objective function. We can divide optimization methods into first-order methods,
which use gradient (first derivative) information of f at xt, e.g., gradient descent; and second-order methods, which
additionally rely on Hessian (second derivative) information.
Although introducing randomization in optimization algorithms has proven very effective in ML, with variants
of SGD (AdaGrad, Adam, SVRG, etc.) being widely-used in practice, SGD-based methods still often suffer from
instability, large variances, and extreme sensitivity to hyperparameter choice [177, 97]. In this context, randomized
algorithms based on Modern RandNLA theory can be used to provide better stability, to inject better curvature
information, and to reduce communication and computation costs.
4.1 Gradient Sketch
With SGD, we estimate the first-order (gradient) information by subsampling the components ψi of the objective, and
using those to construct an unbiased estimate ˆgt:
xt+1 = xt − ηtˆgt, where E[ˆgt] = ∇f(xt).
Despite its popularity, SGD has a number of limitations, e.g., large variance E

∥ˆgt−gt∥2

, which slows the convergence
near the optimum, as well as sensitivity to hyper-parameters (such as step size, mini-batch size, etc.). RandNLA offers
a number of techniques for addressing these limitations, such as using weighted gradient sampling based on leverage
scores or other importance scores, as well as using a sketching-based preconditioner. We consider the following.
PreconditionedWeighted SGD. Consider the Preconditioned Weighted SGD (PW-SGD) method (which is shown here
for the LS problem, f(x) = 1
n∥Ax − b∥2, but which is applicable far beyond this setting [74, 1, 87, 42]):
1: Compute SA with some sketching operator S
2: Compute R such that SA = QR−1 for orthogonal Q
3: Compute leverage score estimates˜li for A
4: for t = 0 to T − 1 do
5: Compute gt ← 1
s
Ps
i=1
Z
˜l
Ii
∇ψIi (xt), Pr(Ii) ∝ ˜lIi .
6: Compute xt+1 ← xt − ηtRR⊤gt
7: end for
11
This algorithm uses a sketching operator S to construct the R, which is the preconditioner of the problem, since its
spectrum approximates the spectrum of (the inverse of) A. Moreover, the algorithm uses leverage score estimates of A,
which are used for subsampling the gradients (but this can be replaced by other sketching/sub-sampling schemes).
Thanks to a combination of preconditioning and importance sampling, this version of PW-SGD can completely
avoid any condition number dependence in its convergence rate [34]. In particular, suppose that the leverage score
estimates satisfy: ˜li ≥ li(A)/α for all i. Then, letting ηt := β
1+βt/8 for β = k/8
k+4αd , this version of PW-SGD satisfies:
E[f(xt) − f(x∗)] ≤
f(x0)
1 + st/(cαd)
∀t≥1.
The key advantage here is that the resulting iteration complexity t = O(d/sϵ) is entirely independent of the number
of data points n or of the condition number κ of matrix A [34], whereas classical SGD may require as many as
O(nκ2/sϵ) iterations. For reaching a moderate precision solution (the regime of greatest interest in ML and data
science applications), the computational cost comparison shows that this method is faster than Sketch-and-Solve or
Sketch-and-Precondition [34].
There are also other RandNLA-based approaches for sketching the gradient information of the objective: in
non-finite-sum settings, e.g., Sega [96]; for distributed/federated learning, e.g., FetchSGD [160]; methods inspired by
randomized coordinate descent [147, 111]; and randomized preconditioning for other stochastic gradient methods, e.g.,
Preconditioned SVRG and SVRN [87, 42], and others [90, 117].
4.2 Hessian Sketch
RandNLA methods have proven particularly effective at efficiently extracting second-order information about the
optimization objective [159, 152, 48]. This has led to many sketching-based Newton-type optimization algorithms.
Recall that Newton’s method represents the paradigmic second-order optimization algorithm, which minimizes a local
quadratic approximation of the objective using gradient gt = ∇f(xt) and Hessian Ht = ∇2f(xt):
xt+1 = xt + argmin
v
n
g⊤
t v +
ηt
2
v⊤Htv
o
= xt − ηtH−1
t gt.
As an example, consider a standard Generalized Linear Model (GLM), f(x) = 1
n
Pn
i=1 li(a⊤
i x) + γ
2 ∥x∥2, where a⊤
i x
represents a linear prediction associated with a data point ai ∈ Rd, and loss li encodes the prediction error, dependent
on a label yi. For instance, in logistic regression, we have yi = ±1 and li(a⊤
i x) = log(1+e−yia⊤
i x). Here, the Hessian
at xt is given by:
∇2f(xt) =
1
n
A⊤DtA + γI, Dt := diag(l′′
1 (a⊤
1 xt), ..., l′′
n(a⊤
nxt)),
where the dominant cost is the O(nd2) matrix multiplication A⊤DtA. It is natural to reduce this cost with RandNLA
sketching or sub-sampling, by repacing A⊤DtA with A˜⊤
t A˜t where A˜t = StD1/2
t A for some sketching matrix St. One
version of this leads to the Newton Sketch [152]:
xt+1 = xt − ηt ˆH −1
t gt, ˆHt =
1
n
A˜⊤
t
A˜t + γI.
Standard RandNLA guarantees such as the subspace embedding are sufficient (although not necessary) to ensure that
ˆH
t provides a good enough approximation to enable accelerated local convergence in time ˜O(nd).
These approaches have also been extended to distributed settings via RMT-based model averaging, with applications
in ensemble methods, distributed optimization, and federated learning [110, 109, 144, 48, 92]. Further RandNLA-based
Newton-type methods include: Subsampled Newton [75, 159, 18, 17]; Hessian approximations via randomized Taylor
expansion [1] and low-rank approximation [77, 55]; Hessian diagonal/trace estimates via Hutchinson’s method [136]
and Stochastic Lanczos Quadrature, particularly for non-convex problems, e.g., PyHessian [176], AdaHessian [177];
and finally Stochastic Quasi-Newton type methods [106, 137].
12
4.3 Sketch-and-Project
The Sketch-and-Project framework has gained attention as a powerful methodology within the Iterative Sketching
paradigm of RandNLA. While this framework has found applications across the stochastic optimization landscape, it
originally arose from randomized algorithms for solving systems of linear equations.
Solving an m × n linear system Ax = b can be viewed as an instance of the LS problem, i.e., minimizing the
objective f(x) = ∥Ax − b∥22
. As discussed in Sec. 2.2, Classical RandNLA has addressed this problem in the highly
over- or under-determined settings (i.e., when A is very tall or wide). However, in many applications, particularly
high-dimensional settings that arise in ML, m and n are (equal or) of comparable size.
For these nearly-square matrix problems, randomization can still be beneficial, in particular when using Modern
RandNLA methods. For instance, consider the classical Kaczmarz algorithm, which solves a linear system of m
equations a⊤
i x = bi via the following iterative procedure, starting from some x0:
1: for t = 0 to T − 1 do
2: Select index It ∈ {1, ...,m}
3: xt+1 ←Project xt onto the solutions of equation a⊤
It
x = bIt
4: end for
This simple procedure has been known for a long time [103], but only with the use of randomization are we able to
characterize its convergence [166]: if the Kaczmarz method selects index It randomly, with probability proportional to
∥aIt∥22
, then:
E∥xt − x∗∥22
≤

1 −
σ2
min(A)
∥A∥2
F
t
∥x0 − x∗∥22
.
We can interpret this Randomized Kaczmarz (RK) method as a Weighted SGD algorithm solving the finite-sum
minimization problem (8) with ψi(x) = (a⊤
i x − bi)2 [147], drawing a parallel with PW-SGD as described in Sec. 4.1.
However, this paradigm becomes quite different from PW-SGD once we select more than one equation at a time,
giving rise to Sketch-and-Project [91]: Sample a random k × m matrix S = S(t), and project xt onto the solutions of
SAx = Sb:
xt+1 = argmin
x
∥xt − x∥22
subject to SAx = Sb.
We recover RK if the matrix S is chosen to be the indicator vector of the equation It. However, this general framework
(with Modern RandNLA tools from Sec. 3) allows for other natural choices, such as selecting blocks of equations
(Block Kaczmarz, e.g., [146, 145, 154]) or sketching the input matrix A using any of the methods described earlier. The
Sketch-and-Project framework has been used to capture and extend other stochastic optimization methods, including
Coordinate Descent [114, 111, 88], and to develop more general purpose first- and second-order optimization algorithms
[89, 106, 95, 178].
Going beyond RK, the convergence analysis of Sketch-and-Project has proven much more challenging, largely due
to the complex interdependence between the distribution of the sketching matrix S and the spectrum of the input matrix
A. However, by using tools from Modern RandNLA theory [155, 143, 50], we can relate this convergence to the quality
of the sketch SA as a low-rank approximation of the data [56]:
E∥xt − x∗∥22
≲

1 −
kσ2
min(A)
E∥A − APSA∥2
F
t
∥x0 − x∗∥22
. (9)
Here, E∥A − APSA∥2
F is the projection error of the low-rank approximation of A produced from the sketch SA, same
as in equation (3) from Sec. 2.3 (except sketched on the other side). This analysis has revealed new classes of problems
(often overlapping with ML domains that exhibit low-rank structure) for which Sketch-and-Project methods offer
dramatically improved peformance over the more traditional Sketch-and-Precondition paradigm [60, 49], thanks to the
implicit preconditioning phenomenon that is described by (9).
13
5 Advances in RandNLA for ML and Statistics
So far, we have primarily focused on how RandNLA can be used to address ML and data science problems from a
purely algorithmic perspective: the data (e.g., matrix A and vector b) is given and deterministic, and our goal is to
directly compute or estimate a property of the data (e.g., the LS solution). With this problem formulation, randomization
has entered solely from the algorithm design perspective, and thus it is fully controllable by the practitioner.
However, when we consider the same problems from a statistical perspective, the data is often assumed to be random
itself, e.g., coming from some data distribution (which may or may not be known) and distorted by some random noise
(e.g., Gaussian). In this case, our goal is often to estimate a quantity that may depend on an unobserved part of the data
distribution, in which case we must account for the generalization error, in addition to the approximation error that was
our focus so far. In this section, we delve into how randomization coming from RandNLA interacts with the inherent
data randomness, and how that affects the design and implementation of these methods.
5.1 Statistical Learning Approaches
We start by considering a statistical learning theory perspective on generalization error, which is most traditionally
exemplified by the probably approximately correct (PAC) model of learning. Here, we often assume very little about
the underlying data distribution, leading to a worst-case view of the generalization error. This forces our algorithmic
approaches to exhibit a certain degree of robustness to the unobserved data. We show that RandNLA techniques
naturally inject such robustness into ML algorithms, as they are also designed to work well under worst-case settings.
Robust semi-supervised learning. As a key motivating example, let us return to LS regression. So far, we have
framed this problem so that given a matrix A and vector b, we want to find x∗ = argminx ∥Ax − b∥22
. However, what
if part of this data is withheld, for instance due to the cost of procuring the labels?
Formally, suppose that we are given a data matrix A ∈ Rn×d with n unlabeled data points: a1, . . . , an ∈ Rd
(transposed rows of A). For each point ai, we can decide to query the random label bi ∈ R. Our goal is to query subset
S ⊆ {1, ..., n} of at most s ≪ n labels and output ˆx that has small error
Ef(ˆx) := E
1
n
Xn
i=1
(a⊤
i ˆx − bi)2 = E
1
n
∥Aˆx − b∥22
.
Note that, due to the underlying statistical randomness and the fact that we do not have access to all of the data, this is
now a generalization error, and the problem is not purely computational in nature. The question is: How should we
choose the data points to label?
This task might seem dramatically different than the classical LS task that is tackled by Classical RandNLA. Yet,
recent works have shown that RandNLA subsampling techniques, such as leverage score sampling and DPPs, play a
crucial role in ensuring good generalization error in this setting. In particular, it is known (e.g., [124, 59]) that for any
fixed A and random b, if we query a subset S of s = O(d log d + d/ϵ) entries of b sampled according to A’s leverage
scores, and compute ˆx = argminx ∥ASx − bS∥22
, then:
Ef(ˆx) ≤ (1 + ϵ) min
x
Ef(x).
Crucially, the sampling method used here does not require any knowledge about the label distribution, which means
that it gives a very robust generalization error guarantee. In fact, one can show that randomization is actually necessary
in the label selection, to protect against adversarial label distributions [58].
This robust learning via RandNLA sampling has been further refined by relying on non-i.i.d. approaches such as
DPPs (using tools from Sec. 3.2) and related methods [57, 59, 33]. It has also been extended to other regression losses via
different sampling schemes (inverse scores, Lewis weights, ridge leverage, sensitivity scores, etc.) [46, 32, 150, 141, 31],
as well as to other statistical learning settings such as single index models [79] and generalized linear models [101].
14
Kernel-based learning. RandNLA subsampling methods have also been extended to “non-linear” learning tasks, via
kernel-based learning methods. These approaches work by constructing a mapping ϕ : X → F from the data space X
to an expanded feature space F. While the expanded data vectors are never explicitly computed, we can learn about the
geometry of the dataset by looking at the pairwise inner products between ith and jth data point, which are obtained
through the so-called kernel function k(xi, xj) = ϕ(xi)⊤ϕ(xj). In the resulting learning problem, we receive a dataset
(xi, yi)ni
=1 ∼ D, and construct an estimator ˜ f for f∗ by minimizing a regularized objective over the kernel space F:
min
f∈F
1
n
Xn
i=1
ℓ(f(xi), yi) +
λ
2
∥f∥2
F,
where ∥f∥F is the norm induced by F and ℓ is a loss function. Using square loss and the representer theorem, this can
be cast as kernel ridge regression (KRR), which is equivalent to solving the following regularized linear system:
(K + nλI)α = y, (10)
where K =

ϕ(x(i))⊤ϕ(x(j))

ij is the n × n PSD kernel matrix that includes all pairwise inner products in the feature
space, and α is a vector from which we can recover the prediction function f as f(xi) = [Kα]i.
Naturally, we could now use RandNLA techniques, such as those discussed in Sec. 4, to solve (10) directly. However,
this being a statistical learning problem significantly affects our algorithmic choices. To start, note that we are not given
K as input, but rather we must compute each of its entries via the kernel function k(·, ·). In fact, even just forming K at
the cost of n2 kernel evaluations is a computational bottleneck we may wish to avoid. On the other hand, due to the
presence of generalization error, we do not need to solve the problem to high precision.
We can address both of these considerations by exploiting the fact that the kernel matrix K has a PSD structure. This
allows us to approximate it efficiently without even forming the entire matrix K by relying on a Nyström approximation:
˜K
= KS(S⊤KS)−1S⊤K,
where S is an n × s subsampling matrix such that KS selects s columns from K and S⊤KS selects an s × s principal
submatrix of K. Thus, the Nyström method requires only ns kernel evaluations, i.e., sublinear in the size of K. This
approach is closely linked to the LR approximations described in Sec. 2.3: using the PSD property of the kernel matrix
K, we can express it as K = A⊤A for some matrix A; then, the Nyström approximation is given by ˜K = A⊤PASA,
and its spectral/Frobenius error is ∥K − ˜K∥ξ = ∥A−PASA∥2ξ
, which corresponds to the LR projection error (3) for A.
A long line of works at the intersection of ML and RandNLA have shown that this method can be used to produce
kernel ridge regression estimators with strong generalization guarantees faster than it takes to form the kernel matrix
K. While early efforts proposed using uniform subsampling to select the rows/columns of K [170, 11, 163], more
recent works have shown that RandNLA-style subsampling using ridge leverage scores yields more robust estimators
[3, 140, 162]. This has been further improved with DPP sampling [45, 28, 47].
Additional related works on the Nyström method include applications to Gaussian Process regression [28, 29],
Nyström-based sketching [86, 14] and preconditioning [8, 78, 77, 55], sublinear time LR approximation of other
structured matrices [142, 13], and sublinear time DPP sampling algorithms [45, 30, 7].
5.2 Statistical Inference Approaches
Next, we consider how RandNLA interacts with and informs statistical inference approaches to modeling and analyzing
data. In statistical inference, it is common to impose strict assumptions on the generative model of the data, e.g., that the
feature vectors are coming from a Gaussian or sub-Gaussian distribution, and that the predicted variable follows some
underlying linear model distorted by noise. This generative modeling approach enables a wide range of inferential tools
for designing, optimizing and evaluating estimators. These tools include cross-validation, feature selection, reliable
confidence intervals, the Bootstrap method, the Jackknife, etc. This might seem in stark contrast to the RandNLA
approach to data, which has largely been centered on robustness to the worst-case and avoiding data assumptions. As
we have seen in previous sections, a typical framework for RandNLA algorithms is that we are given an arbitrary input
matrix A with no distributional assumptions.
15
Sketching Statistics
Big data Population
Arbitrary input Gaussian input
Sketch Sample
Algorithmic
Gaussianization
Statistical model
Figure 2: An illustration of the connection between RandNLA and statistical inference. Even though the input matrix A
for a RandNLA algorithm is often arbitrary and deterministic, the Algorithmic Gaussianization effect of sketching turns
this matrix into a random data sample A˜ (the sketch), which follows a generative model like those in statistical inference.
To see that there is a strong connection, however, recall that instead of operating directly on A, we first compute a
smaller sketch A˜ = SA, and then we use that sketch to estimate the target properties of the data. This means that, even
though the input matrix A is deterministic and arbitrary, the matrix A˜ which we use for the data analysis follows a
well-defined generative model—and one which, for many sketching operators, is very close to a sub-Gaussian data
model used in statistical inference. See Fig. 2 for an illustration. This motivates a statistical view of the numerical
algorithms based on sketching, unlocking the vast wealth of inferential tools that can be applied to any approaches
based on the Sketch-and-Solve paradigm and beyond.
Bootstrap error estimation for sketching. One application of this viewpoint is error estimation. A common shortcoming
of Classical RandNLA error guarantees is that they are overly pessimistic due to their worst-case nature,
and therefore, they do not provide accurate predictions of the actual error incurred by the produced estimates. For
instance, consider the sketched LS estimator: given a deterministic matrix A ∈ Rn×d and a vector b ∈ Rn, reduce the
problem with a random sketching matrix S ∈ Rs×n, defining ˜ A := SA and˜b := Sb, and use that to compute ˜x :=
argminx ∥ ˜ Ax −˜b∥2. How well does this particular estimate ˜x approximate the optimum x∗ := argminx ∥Ax − b∥2?
In other words, we would like to efficiently compute a numerical estimate ˜q(α) such that
∥˜x − x∗∥2 ≤ ˜q(α) with probability 1 − α.
In statistical inference, this is often done using the Bootstrap method: by artificially generating another estimate ˆx
such that the fluctuations of ˆx − ˜x are similar to the fluctuations of ˜x − x∗. This so-called bootstrapped estimate ˆx
can be obtained as the LS solution obtained by “perturbing” ˜ A and˜b (e.g., by sub-sampling with replacement). While
traditional analysis of the boostrap has required a sub-Gaussian model of the data, in RandNLA we can rely on the
Gaussianizing effect of sketching and RMT analysis to show that bootstrap error estimation is provably reliable, even
for arbitrary input matrices A [118, 120].
Separation between sketching methods. Another application of the statistical viewpoint on RandNLA is providing
a fine-grained performance analysis of different sketching or estimation methods which are indistinguishable under
worst-case bounds [63, 35, 109, 51]. In particular, such analysis has been performed for the above sketched LS estimator,
showing that with a fixed sketch-to-data aspect ratio s/n, asymptotic error for orthogonal (Hadamard or Haar) sketches
is less than for i.i.d/sub-Gaussian sketches [63, 109].
Further related advances in applying statistical inference techniques to RandNLA include fine-grained analysis of
RandNLA importance sampling, e.g., [121, 153, 122], and LR approximation [173], bootstrapping sketched covariance
estimation [119], as well as uncertainty quantification for randomized linear system solvers [16, 38].
16
0 10 20 30 40 50
Sketch size
0
10
20
30
40
50
Approximation factor
Worst-case
Using RMT
Experiments
Figure 3: Fine-grained RMT analysis of LR approximation reveals a multiple-descent phenomenon that is not predicted
by worst-case analysis.
5.3 Connections with Modern RMT
One of the key tools in Modern RandNLA for developing fine-grained understanding of the performance of RandNLA
algorithms, including those inspired by the above statistical inference viewpoint, has been the use of techniques from
both asymptotic and non-asymptotic RMT. These techniques are particularly important when dealing with matrices
with a statistically well-understood data distribution, where worst-case performance guarantees can be significantly
misleading.
While Classical RandNLA has focused on describing the performance of the algorithms solely in terms of the
dimensions of the input (or possibly also its sparsity), it has been shown that for many tasks it is the spectral decay
profile of the data (i.e, the rate of descrease of the singular values of a matrix A) that is most informative about the
performance of these algorithms. In fact, for many ML tasks, the spectral decay profile of the data can often be sharply
characterized, for example, in terms of whether we expect a heavy-tailed, short-tailed, or spiked profile [130]. This can
have a dramatic effect on the design and performance of RandNLA algorithms.
Multiple-descent in LR approximation. As an example, consider the task of LR matrix approximation. As discussed
in Sec. 2.3, in this task our goal is to construct a near-optimal rank k approximation of an m × n matrix A. A simple
way of doing this involves computing an m × k sketch AS and then projecting the matrix A onto the rank k subspace
defined by AS. Then, we can measure the quality of the output by comparing its error to the error of the best rank k
approximation of A, obtained via the Top-k Truncated Singular Value Decomposition (Top-k SVD):
Low-rank approximation factor =
∥A − PASA∥2
F
∥A − Ak∥2
F
,
where ∥A−PASA∥2
F is the LR projection error as in (3), and ∥A−Ak∥2
F is the Top-k SVD error. Classical worst-case
analysis suggests that even for Gaussian-like sketching methods, the approximation factor for this basic approach
is large and grows with k, as seen in Fig. 3 (black dotted line). This has been addressed by computationally more
expensive approaches that involve increasing the sketch size or using block power iteration [94]. However, recent
RMT-style analysis (Fig. 3, red solid line; see [47, 50]) reveals that for many data matrices, the true approximation
factor is much smaller, i.e., it typically does not grow with k, and we can characterize it fully based on the spectral
decay profile of the matrix A. These ideas have been further developed in other applications of RandNLA, including
randomized PCA [35], Gaussian Processes [28], iterative optimization [48, 109], and in connections with the double
descent phenomenon in over-parameterized ML models [51].
17
Implicit regularization in sketching. Another important consequence of the fine-grained RMT analysis in RandNLA
is a characterization of the implicit regularization phenomenon. Implicit regularization commonly refers to the
regularizing effect that stochastic algorithms (such as SGD) have on the trained ML model [149, 130]; but, fundamentally,
it has to do with explicit statistical problems that fast approximation algorithms implicitly solve exactly [129, 125].
Empirical results [168, 44] have shown that such a regularizing effect is caused by the stochasticity coming from the
use of sketching operators; and recent theory makes this precise [51, 112, 113].
A key example of this phenomenon occurs in sketched ridge regression, which is an extension of the LS task, where
given A, b and parameter γ, we aim to approximate x∗ = argmin ∥Ax − b∥22
+ γ∥x∥22
by relying on the sketched data
SA and Sb. This raises the question of what regularization parameter ˜γ should be used when computing the sketched
estimate:
˜x = argmin
x
∥S(Ax − b)∥22
+ ˜γ∥x∥22
.
Here, again, Classical RandNLA analysis is not sensitive enough to detect the implicit regularization effect, and suggests
that the correct regularization parameter should be the same as for the original task, ˜γ = γ. However, recent fine-grained
results have enabled characterizing the bias of the sketched estimators showing that we must shrink the regularization
parameter ˜γ to correct for implicit regularization [44]:
E[˜x] ≍ x∗, if ˜γ = γ ·

1 −
dγ
s

,
where dγ = tr(A⊤A(A⊤A + γI)−1) is the γ-effective dimension of A and s is the sketch size. Similar implicit
regularization results have been shown for sketching-based distributed regression [64], sampling-based ensemble
methods [112], stochastic optimization [48], LR approximation [50, 113] and randomized rounding [62].
6 Putting Randomness into Next-generation Software
Beyond BLAS/LAPACK to RandBLAS/RandLAPACK. One of the promises of RandNLA has been that it will
lead to improved implementations in practice. Indeed, the conclusion of the Blendenpik paper [9], in 2010, was
that “Blendenpik beats LAPACK’s direct dense least-squares solver by a large margin on essentially any dense tall
matrix,” and that “these results show the potential of random-sampling algorithms and suggest that random-projection
algorithms should be incorporated into future versions of LAPACK.”1 This, in 2024, is timely: recent years have
seen the convergence of several unprecedented changes, including formidable new system design constraints and
revolutionary levels of hardware heterogeneity; and, due to these changes, much of the essential software infrastructure
of computational science and engineering is, or will soon be, obsolete. These challenges motivated the BALLISTIC
(“Basic ALgebra LIbraries for Sustainable Technology with Interdisciplinary Collaboration”) project [40], which aims
to enhance and update BLAS, LAPACK, and ScaLAPACK (“Scalable Linear Algebra PACKage”) by “incorporating
them into a layered package of software components ... that provides users seamless access to state-of-the-art solver
implementations through familiar and improved Sca/LAPACK interfaces.”
As part of the BALLISTIC project [40], we are introducing the use of RandNLA methods into BLAS and LAPACK,
leading to RandBLAS and RandLAPACK [138]. RandBLAS will be a library that concerns basic sketching for dense
data matrices (with a reference implementation in C++). Analogous to the original BLAS, it will be a “contract”
between algorithm developers and hardware developers. RandLAPACK will be a library that concerns algorithms for
solving traditional linear algebra problems and advanced sketching functionality (to be written in C++ and built on
1For readers not familiar with it, LAPACK (“Linear Algebra PACKage”) is a standard software library for NLA which provides routines for
solving systems of linear equations and linear least squares, eigenvalue problems, and singular value decomposition, as well as routines to implement
the associated matrix factorizations such as LU, QR, Cholesky and Schur decomposition. It relies on an underlying BLAS (“Basic Linear Algebra
Subprograms”) implementation to provide efficient and portable computational building blocks for its routines, where BLAS is a specification that
prescribes a set of low-level routines for performing common linear algebra operations such as vector addition, scalar multiplication, dot products,
linear combinations, and matrix multiplication [15]. Importantly, although the BLAS specification is general, BLAS implementations are often
optimized for speed on a particular machine, and they can bring substantial performance benefits, e.g., since BLAS implementations can take
advantage of special floating point hardware.
18
BLAS++/LAPACK++ portability layer). Analogous to the original LAPACK, it will consist of three main “drivers” (LS
and optimization, LR approximation, and full-rank decompositions, in the case of RandLAPACK), and it will have
“computational routines” (such as advanced sketching and error estimation). The hope is that RandBLAS grows to
become a “community standard” for RandNLA, more broadly than RandLAPACK, in the sense that its API would see
wider adoption than any single implementation.
The connection with and value of Modern RandNLA for RandBLAS/RandLAPACK (and other such software
projects) is subtle but important: due to the use of RMT-based ideas, in particular Def. 2 of a nearly-unbiased estimator,
we can obtain a much smaller theory-practice gap than was possible with Classical RandNLA, which depended on the
notion of a subspace embedding from Def. 1, for a broad range of implementations [44, 109, 110]. For implementations
in the past, one often used expensive Gaussian random projections to obtain stronger theory; and then implementations
may or may not have used Gaussian random projections; thus leading to a potentially-large theory practice gap. However,
with the methods of Modern RandNLA, which with (6) provide stronger control on the inversion bias, one can hope to
analyze the distribution being implemented.
Beyond Single-machine Shared-memory. Going beyond the single-machine shared-memory setup, recent work within
ML has focused on model training and inference: often with GPUs rather than CPUs; often in parallel/distributed setups;
and often using low-precision computation. Classical RandNLA methods have proven successful here, in particular
in comparison to heavily hyperparameterized SGD methods [177]. An emerging challenge with training and serving
these models more generally involves memory and communication bottlenecks. In particular, ML applications are often
bottlenecked by intra/inter-chip and communication across/to ML accelerators, rather than compute, a phenomenon
referred to as the memory wall problem [83]. Quantization is one solution [82], and recent work (using Modern
RandNLA theory) suggests the promise of using RandNLA methods here too [116].
7 Concluding thoughts
There are many topics we did not cover: data-driven methods for learning good sketching operators [99, 100, 36];
RandNLA methods for tensor decompositions [169, 115, 76, 102]; RandNLA methods in streaming/online environments
[27]; probabilistic numerics [16]; as well as topics such as Hutchinson and spectral function methods [158, 177], using
randomness deep inside an algorithm, e.g., for pivot rule decisions, using these methods for the theory/practice of
neural networks, e.g., NTK and Nystromformer, using these methods for quantization and low-precision computation
[82, 83, 62], and using these methods to deal with graph-related and other structured matrices such as Laplacians
[70, 105, 127]. In many of these cases, it is increasingly-important to identify core linear algebraic structures and build
algorithmic/statistical methods around them (rather than “tacking” them on later as a “band aid” to fix problems that
arise when one ignores key linear algebraic issues). This will be increasingly-important as heterogeneous hardware
trends and ML training trends continue to grow. We expect the “Modern” theoretical tools developed by/for RandNLA
that we have covered will be useful in these and other situations.
Acknowledgments
MD would like to acknowledge NSF CAREER for partial support. MWM would like to acknowledge the NSF and
ONR via its BRC on RandNLA for partial support of this work.
References
[1] Naman Agarwal, Brian Bullins, and Elad Hazan. Second-order stochastic optimization for machine learning in
linear time. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(1):4148–4187, 2017.
[2] Nir Ailon and Bernard Chazelle. The fast Johnson–Lindenstrauss transform and approximate nearest neighbors.
SIAM Journal on computing, 39(1):302–322, 2009.
19
[3] Ahmed El Alaoui and Michael W. Mahoney. Fast randomized kernel ridge regression with statistical guarantees.
In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 775–783,
2015.
[4] Nima Anari and Michał Derezi´nski. Isotropy and Log-Concave Polynomials: Accelerated Sampling and High-
Precision Counting of Matroid Bases. Proceedings of the 61st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
Science, 2020.
[5] Nima Anari, Michał Derezi´nski, Thuy-Duong Vuong, and Elizabeth Yang. Domain sparsification of discrete
distributions using entropic independence. Proceedings of the 13th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science
(ITCS) conference, 2022.
[6] Nima Anari, Shayan Oveis Gharan, and Alireza Rezaei. Monte carlo markov chain algorithms for sampling
strongly Rayleigh distributions and determinantal point processes. In 29th Annual Conference on Learning
Theory, pages 103–115. PMLR, 23–26 Jun 2016.
[7] Nima Anari, Yang P Liu, and Thuy-Duong Vuong. Optimal sublinear sampling of spanning trees and determinantal
point processes via average-case entropic independence. In 2022 IEEE 63rd Annual Symposium on
Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 123–134. IEEE, 2022.
[8] Haim Avron, Kenneth L Clarkson, and David P Woodruff. Faster kernel ridge regression using sketching and
preconditioning. SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications, 38(4):1116–1138, 2017.
[9] Haim Avron, Petar Maymounkov, and Sivan Toledo. Blendenpik: Supercharging LAPACK’s least-squares solver.
SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 32(3):1217–1236, 2010.
[10] Haim Avron, Esmond Ng, and Sivan Toledo. Using perturbed QR factorizations to solve linear least-squares
problems. SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications, 31(2):674–693, 2009.
[11] Francis Bach. Sharp analysis of low-rank kernel matrix approximations. In Conference on learning theory, pages
185–209. PMLR, 2013.
[12] J. Baik and J. W. Silverstein. Eigenvalues of large sample covariance matrices of spiked population models.
Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 97(6):1382–1408, 2006.
[13] Ainesh Bakshi and David Woodruff. Sublinear time low-rank approximation of distance matrices. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
[14] Oleg Balabanov, Matthias Beaupère, Laura Grigori, and Victor Lederer. Block subsampled randomized Hadamard
transform for low-rank approximation on distributed architectures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11295, 2022.
[15] R. Barrett, M. Berry, T. F. Chan, J. Demmel, J. Donato, J. Dongarra, V. Eijkhout, R. Pozo, C. Romine, and H. Van
der Vorst. Templates for the Solution of Linear Systems: Building Blocks for Iterative Methods, 2nd Edition.
SIAM, Philadelphia, 1994.
[16] Simon Bartels, Jon Cockayne, Ilse CF Ipsen, and Philipp Hennig. Probabilistic linear solvers: a unifying view.
Statistics and Computing, 29:1249–1263, 2019.
[17] Albert S Berahas, Raghu Bollapragada, and Jorge Nocedal. An investigation of Newton-sketch and subsampled
Newton methods. Optimization Methods and Software, 35(4):661–680, 2020.
[18] Raghu Bollapragada, Richard H Byrd, and Jorge Nocedal. Exact and inexact subsampled Newton methods for
optimization. IMA Journal of Numerical Analysis, 39(2), 2018.
[19] A. Borodin. Determinantal point processes. In Oxford handbook of random matrix theory, pages 231–249.
Oxford University Press, 2011.
20
[20] A. Borodin and G. Olshanski. Distributions on partitions, point processes, and the hypergeometric kernel.
Communications in Mathematical Physics, 211(2):335–358, 2000.
[21] Leon Bottou and Olivier Bousquet. The tradeoffs of large scale learning. In Proceedings of the 20th International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’07, pages 161–168, USA, 2007. Curran Associates
Inc.
[22] C. Boutsidis, M. W. Mahoney, and P. Drineas. Unsupervised feature selection for principal components analysis.
In Proceedings of the 14th Annual ACM SIGKDD Conference, pages 61–69, 2008.
[23] C. Boutsidis, M. W. Mahoney, and P. Drineas. An improved approximation algorithm for the column subset
selection problem. In Proceedings of the 20th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages
968–977, 2009.
[24] C. Boutsidis, M.W. Mahoney, and P. Drineas. Unsupervised feature selection for the k-means clustering problem.
In Annual Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 22: Proceedings of the 2009 Conference, 2009.
[25] Christos Boutsidis, Petros Drineas, and Malik Magdon-Ismail. Near optimal column-based matrix reconstruction.
In 2011 IEEE 52nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 305–314, Oct 2011.
[26] Tatiana Brailovskaya and Ramon van Handel. Universality and sharp matrix concentration inequalities. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2201.05142, 2022.
[27] Vladimir Braverman, Petros Drineas, Cameron Musco, Christopher Musco, Jalaj Upadhyay, David P Woodruff,
and Samson Zhou. Near optimal linear algebra in the online and sliding window models. In 2020 IEEE 61st
Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 517–528. IEEE, 2020.
[28] David Burt, Carl Edward Rasmussen, and Mark Van Der Wilk. Rates of convergence for sparse variational
Gaussian process regression. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
862–871, 2019.
[29] Daniele Calandriello, Luigi Carratino, Alessandro Lazaric, Michal Valko, and Lorenzo Rosasco. Gaussian
process optimization with adaptive sketching: Scalable and no regret. In Conference on Learning Theory, 2019.
[30] Daniele Calandriello, Michał Derezi´nski, and Michal Valko. Sampling from a k-DPP without looking at all
items. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6889–6899, 2020.
[31] Cheng Chen, Yi Li, and Yiming Sun. Online active regression. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
pages 3320–3335. PMLR, 2022.
[32] Xue Chen and Michał Derezi´nski. Query complexity of least absolute deviation regression via robust uniform
convergence. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 1144–1179. PMLR, 2021.
[33] Xue Chen and Eric Price. Active regression via linear-sample sparsification. In Proceedings of the 32nd
Conference on Learning Theory, pages 663–695, 2019.
[34] Shabarish Chenakkod, Michał Derezi´nski, Xiaoyu Dong, and Mark Rudelson. Optimal embedding dimension
for sparse subspace embeddings. Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), 2024.
[35] Jocelyn T Chi and Ilse CF Ipsen. Randomized least squares regression: Combining model-and algorithm-induced
uncertainties. Tehnical Report, 1:34, 2018.
[36] Younghyun Cho, James W Demmel, Michał Derezi´nski, Haoyun Li, Hengrui Luo, Michael W Mahoney, and
Riley J Murray. Surrogate-based autotuning for randomized sketching algorithms in regression problems. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.15720, 2023.
[37] Kenneth L. Clarkson and David P. Woodruff. Low-rank approximation and regression in input sparsity time. J.
ACM, 63(6):54:1–54:45, January 2017.
21
[38] Jon Cockayne, Ilse CF Ipsen, Chris J Oates, and Tim W Reid. Probabilistic iterative methods for linear systems.
The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(1):10505–10538, 2021.
[39] Michael B Cohen, Jelani Nelson, and David P Woodruff. Optimal approximate matrix product in terms of
stable rank. In 43rd International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2016).
Schloss-Dagstuhl-Leibniz Zentrum für Informatik, 2016.
[40] J. Demmel, J. Dongarra, J. Langou, J. Langou, P. Luszczek, and M. W. Mahoney. Prospectus for the Next
LAPACK and ScaLAPACK Libraries: Basic ALgebra LIbraries for Sustainable Technology with Interdisciplinary
Collaboration (BALLISTIC). Technical Report LAWNs (LAPACK Working Notes), lawn297, ICL-UT-20-07,
2020.
[41] Michał Derezi´nski. Fast determinantal point processes via distortion-free intermediate sampling. In Proceedings
of the 32nd Conference on Learning Theory, pages 1029–1049, 2019.
[42] Michał Derezi´nski. Stochastic variance-reduced Newton: Accelerating finite-sum minimization with large
batches. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.02702, 2022.
[43] Michał Derezi´nski. Algorithmic gaussianization through sketching: Converting data into sub-Gaussian random
designs. In The Thirty Sixth Annual Conference on Learning Theory, pages 3137–3172. PMLR, 2023.
[44] Michał Derezi´nski, Burak Bartan, Mert Pilanci, and Michael W Mahoney. Debiasing distributed second order
optimization with surrogate sketching and scaled regularization. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 33:6684–6695, 2020.
[45] Michał Derezi´nski, Daniele Calandriello, and Michal Valko. Exact sampling of determinantal point processes
with sublinear time preprocessing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 11542–11554,
2019.
[46] Michał Derezi´nski, Kenneth L. Clarkson, MichaelW. Mahoney, and Manfred K.Warmuth. Minimax experimental
design: Bridging the gap between statistical and worst-case approaches to least squares regression. In Proceedings
of the Thirty-Second Conference on Learning Theory, pages 1050–1069, 2019.
[47] Michał Derezi´nski, Rajiv Khanna, and Michael W Mahoney. Improved guarantees and a multiple-descent curve
for the column subset selection problem and the Nyström method. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, volume 33, pages 4953–4964, 2020.
[48] Michał Derezi´nski, Jonathan Lacotte, Mert Pilanci, and Michael W Mahoney. Newton-LESS: Sparsification
without trade-offs for the sketched Newton update. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
34:2835–2847, 2021.
[49] Michał Derezi´nski, Daniel LeJeune, Deanna Needell, and Elizaveta Rebrova. Fine-grained analysis and faster
algorithms for iteratively solving linear systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.05818, 2024.
[50] Michał Derezi´nski, Feynman T Liang, Zhenyu Liao, and Michael W Mahoney. Precise expressions for random
projections: Low-rank approximation and randomized Newton. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 33, 2020.
[51] Michał Derezi´nski, Feynman T Liang, and Michael W Mahoney. Exact expressions for double descent and
implicit regularization via surrogate random design. Advances in neural information processing systems,
33:5152–5164, 2020.
[52] Michał Derezi´nski, Zhenyu Liao, Edgar Dobriban, and Michael Mahoney. Sparse sketches with small inversion
bias. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 1467–1510. PMLR, 2021.
[53] Michał Derezi´nski and Michael W Mahoney. Distributed estimation of the inverse Hessian by determinantal
averaging. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pages 11401–11411. 2019.
22
[54] Michał Derezi´nski and Michael W Mahoney. Determinantal point processes in randomized numerical linear
algebra. Notices of the American Mathematical Society, 68(1):34–45, 2021.
[55] Michał Derezi´nski, Christopher Musco, and Jiaming Yang. Faster linear systems and matrix norm approximation
via multi-level sketched preconditioning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.05865, 2024.
[56] Michał Derezi´nski and Elizaveta Rebrova. Sharp analysis of sketch-and-project methods via a connection to
randomized singular value decomposition. SIAM Journal on Mathematics of Data Science, 6(1):127–153, 2024.
[57] Michał Derezi´nski and Manfred K. Warmuth. Unbiased estimates for linear regression via volume sampling. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30, pages 3087–3096, 2017.
[58] Michał Derezi´nski and Manfred K. Warmuth. Reverse iterative volume sampling for linear regression. Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 19(23):1–39, 2018.
[59] Michał Derezi´nski, Manfred K. Warmuth, and Daniel Hsu. Leveraged volume sampling for linear regression. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31, pages 2510–2519. 2018.
[60] Michał Derezi´nski and Jiaming Yang. Solving linear systems faster than via preconditioning. In Proceedings of
the Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), 2024.
[61] Amit Deshpande, Luis Rademacher, Santosh Vempala, and Grant Wang. Matrix approximation and projective
clustering via volume sampling. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
Algorithm, pages 1117–1126, January 2006.
[62] Gregory Dexter, Christos Boutsikas, Linkai Ma, Ilse CF Ipsen, and Petros Drineas. Stochastic rounding implicitly
regularizes tall-and-thin matrices. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12278, 2024.
[63] Edgar Dobriban and Sifan Liu. Asymptotics for sketching in least squares regression. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
[64] Edgar Dobriban and Yue Sheng. Wonder: Weighted one-shot distributed ridge regression in high dimensions. J.
Mach. Learn. Res., 21(66):1–52, 2020.
[65] P. Drineas, I. Ipsen, E. Kontopoulou, and M. Magdon-Ismail. Structural convergence results for approximations of
dominant subspaces from block Krylov spaces. SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications, 39:567–586,
2018.
[66] P. Drineas, R. Kannan, and M. W. Mahoney. Fast Monte Carlo algorithms for matrices I: Approximating matrix
multiplication. SIAM Journal on Computing, 36:132–157, 2006.
[67] P. Drineas and M. W. Mahoney. RandNLA: Randomized numerical linear algebra. Communications of the ACM,
59:80–90, 2016.
[68] P. Drineas and M. W. Mahoney. Lectures on randomized numerical linear algebra. In The Mathematics of Data,
IAS/Park City Mathematics Series, pages 1–48. AMS/IAS/SIAM, 2018.
[69] P. Drineas, M. W. Mahoney, S. Muthukrishnan, and T. Sarlós. Faster least squares approximation. Numerische
Mathematik, 117(2):219–249, 2010.
[70] P. Drineas and M.W. Mahoney. Effective resistances, statistical leverage, and applications to linear equation
solving. Technical report. Preprint: arXiv:1005.3097 (2010).
[71] Petros Drineas, Malik Magdon-Ismail, Michael W. Mahoney, and David P. Woodruff. Fast approximation of
matrix coherence and statistical leverage. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 13(1):3475–3506, 2012.
[72] Petros Drineas, Michael W Mahoney, and S Muthukrishnan. Sampling algorithms for ℓ2 regression and
applications. In Proceedings of the seventeenth annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete algorithm, pages
1127–1136, 2006.
23
[73] Petros Drineas, Michael W. Mahoney, and S. Muthukrishnan. Relative-error CUR matrix decompositions. SIAM
J. Matrix Anal. Appl., 30(2):844–881, 2008.
[74] David Durfee, Kevin A Lai, and Saurabh Sawlani. L1 regression using Lewis weights preconditioning and
stochastic gradient descent. In Conference On Learning Theory, pages 1626–1656. PMLR, 2018.
[75] Murat A Erdogdu and Andrea Montanari. Convergence rates of sub-sampled Newton methods. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 28:3052–3060, 2015.
[76] N Benjamin Erichson, Krithika Manohar, Steven L Brunton, and J Nathan Kutz. Randomized CP tensor
decomposition. Machine Learning: Science and Technology, 1(2):025012, 2020.
[77] Zachary Frangella, Pratik Rathore, Shipu Zhao, and Madeleine Udell. Promise: Preconditioned stochastic
optimization methods by incorporating scalable curvature estimates. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.02014, 2023.
[78] Zachary Frangella, Joel A Tropp, and Madeleine Udell. Randomized Nystrom preconditioning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.02820, 2021.
[79] Aarshvi Gajjar, Wai Ming Tai, Xingyu Xu, Chinmay Hegde, Christopher Musco, and Yi Li. Agnostic active
learning of single index models with linear sample complexity. Proceedings of the 37th Annual Conference on
Learning Theory (COLT), 2024.
[80] Sachin Garg, Kevin Tan, and Michał Derezi´nski. Distributed least squares in small space via sketching and bias
reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.05343, 2024.
[81] Guillaume Gautier, Rémi Bardenet, and Michal Valko. DPPy: Sampling determinantal point processes with
Python. 2018.
[82] A. Gholami, S. Kim, Z. Dong, Z. Yao, M. W. Mahoney, and K. Keutzer. A survey of quantization methods for
efficient neural network inference. Technical Report Preprint: arXiv:2103.13630, 2021.
[83] A. Gholami, Z. Yao, S. Kim, C. Hooper, M. W. Mahoney, and K. Keutzer. AI and memory wall. Technical
Report Preprint: arXiv:2403.14123, 2024.
[84] Jennifer Gillenwater, Alex Kulesza, Zelda Mariet, and Sergei Vassilvtiskii. A tree-based method for fast repeated
sampling of determinantal point processes. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 2260–2268, 2019.
[85] A. Gittens, J. Kottalam, J. Yang, M. F. Ringenburg, J. Chhugani, E. Racah, M. Singh, Y. Yao, C. Fischer,
O. Ruebel, B. Bowen, N. G. Lewis, M.W. Mahoney, V. Krishnamurthy, and Prabhat. A multi-platform evaluation
of the randomized CX low-rank matrix factorization in Spark. In Proc. 5th International Workshop on Parallel
and Distributed Computing for Large Scale Machine Learning and Big Data Analytics, at IPDPS, 2016.
[86] Alex Gittens and Michael W. Mahoney. Revisiting the Nyström method for improved large-scale machine
learning. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 17(1):3977–4041, 2016.
[87] Alon Gonen, Francesco Orabona, and Shai Shalev-Shwartz. Solving ridge regression using sketched preconditioned
SVRG. In International conference on machine learning, pages 1397–1405. PMLR, 2016.
[88] Robert Gower, Filip Hanzely, Peter Richtárik, and Sebastian U Stich. Accelerated stochastic matrix inversion:
general theory and speeding up BFGS rules for faster second-order optimization. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
[89] Robert Gower, Dmitry Kovalev, Felix Lieder, and Peter Richtárik. RSN: Randomized subspace newton. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
24
[90] Robert Gower, Nicolas Le Roux, and Francis Bach. Tracking the gradients using the Hessian: A new look at
variance reducing stochastic methods. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages
707–715. PMLR, 2018.
[91] Robert M Gower and Peter Richtárik. Randomized iterative methods for linear systems. SIAM Journal on Matrix
Analysis and Applications, 36(4):1660–1690, 2015.
[92] Vipul Gupta, Avishek Ghosh, Michał Derezi´nski, Rajiv Khanna, Kannan Ramchandran, and MichaelWMahoney.
LocalNewton: Reducing communication rounds for distributed learning. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence,
pages 632–642. PMLR, 2021.
[93] Venkatesan Guruswami and Ali K. Sinop. Optimal column-based low-rank matrix reconstruction. In Proceedings
of the Twenty-third Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 1207–1214, 2012.
[94] Nathan Halko, Per-Gunnar Martinsson, and Joel A Tropp. Finding structure with randomness: Probabilistic
algorithms for constructing approximate matrix decompositions. SIAM review, 53(2):217–288, 2011.
[95] Filip Hanzely, Nikita Doikov, Yurii Nesterov, and Peter Richtarik. Stochastic subspace cubic Newton method. In
International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 4027–4038. PMLR, 2020.
[96] Filip Hanzely, Konstantin Mishchenko, and Peter Richtárik. SEGA: Variance reduction via gradient sketching.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
[97] L. Hodgkinson and M. W. Mahoney. Multiplicative noise and heavy tails in stochastic optimization. Technical
Report Preprint: arXiv:2006.06293, 2020.
[98] J Ben Hough, Manjunath Krishnapur, Yuval Peres, and Bálint Virág. Determinantal processes and independence.
Probability surveys, 3:206–229, 2006.
[99] Piotr Indyk, Ali Vakilian, and Yang Yuan. Learning-based low-rank approximations. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
[100] Piotr Indyk, Tal Wagner, and David Woodruff. Few-shot data-driven algorithms for low rank approximation.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:10678–10690, 2021.
[101] Arun Jambulapati, James R Lee, Yang P Liu, and Aaron Sidford. Sparsifying generalized linear models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2311.18145, 2023.
[102] Ruhui Jin, Tamara G Kolda, and Rachel Ward. Faster Johnson–Lindenstrauss transforms via Kronecker products.
Information and Inference: A Journal of the IMA, 10(4):1533–1562, 2021.
[103] M. S. Kaczmarz. Angenaherte auflosung von systemen linearer gleichungen. Bulletin International de l’Academie
Polonaise des Sciences et des Lettres, 35:355–357, 1937.
[104] R. Kannan and S. Vempala. Randomized algorithms in numerical linear algebra. Acta Mathematica, 26:95–135,
2017.
[105] I. Koutis, G. L. Miller, and R. Peng. A fast solver for a class of linear systems. Communications of the ACM,
55(10):99–107, 2012.
[106] Dmitry Kovalev, Konstantin Mishchenko, and Peter Richtárik. Stochastic Newton and cubic Newton methods
with simple local linear-quadratic rates. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01597, 2019.
[107] Alex Kulesza and Ben Taskar. k-DPPs: Fixed-Size Determinantal Point Processes. In Proceedings of the 28th
International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1193–1200, June 2011.
[108] Alex Kulesza and Ben Taskar. Determinantal Point Processes for Machine Learning. Now Publishers Inc.,
Hanover, MA, USA, 2012.
25
[109] Jonathan Lacotte, Sifan Liu, Edgar Dobriban, and Mert Pilanci. Optimal iterative sketching methods with the
subsampled randomized Hadamard transform. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:9725–
9735, 2020.
[110] Jonathan Lacotte and Mert Pilanci. Adaptive and oblivious randomized subspace methods for high-dimensional
optimization: Sharp analysis and lower bounds. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 68(5):3281–3303,
2022.
[111] Yin Tat Lee and Aaron Sidford. Efficient accelerated coordinate descent methods and faster algorithms for
solving linear systems. In 2013 ieee 54th annual symposium on foundations of computer science, pages 147–156.
IEEE, 2013.
[112] Daniel LeJeune, Hamid Javadi, and Richard Baraniuk. The implicit regularization of ordinary least squares
ensembles. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 3525–3535. PMLR, 2020.
[113] Daniel LeJeune, Pratik Patil, Hamid Javadi, Richard G Baraniuk, and Ryan J Tibshirani. Asymptotics of the
sketched pseudoinverse. SIAM Journal on Mathematics of Data Science, 6(1):199–225, 2024.
[114] Dennis Leventhal and Adrian S Lewis. Randomized methods for linear constraints: convergence rates and
conditioning. Mathematics of Operations Research, 35(3):641–654, 2010.
[115] Xingguo Li, Jarvis Haupt, and David Woodruff. Near optimal sketching of low-rank tensor regression. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
[116] Z. Liao, R. Couillet, and M. W. Mahoney. Sparse quantized spectral clustering. Technical Report Preprint:
arXiv:2010.01376, 2020.
[117] Yanli Liu, Fei Feng, and Wotao Yin. Acceleration of SVRG and Katyusha X by inexact preconditioning. In
International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 4003–4012. PMLR, 2019.
[118] Miles Lopes, Shusen Wang, and Michael Mahoney. Error estimation for randomized least-squares algorithms via
the bootstrap. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 3217–3226. PMLR, 2018.
[119] Miles E Lopes, N Benjamin Erichson, and Michael W Mahoney. Bootstrapping the operator norm in high
dimensions: Error estimation for covariance matrices and sketching. Bernoulli, 29(1):428–450, 2023.
[120] Miles E Lopes, Shusen Wang, and Michael W Mahoney. A bootstrap method for error estimation in randomized
matrix multiplication. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20(1):1434–1473, 2019.
[121] P. Ma, M. W. Mahoney, and B. Yu. A statistical perspective on algorithmic leveraging. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 16:861–911, 2015.
[122] Ping Ma, Yongkai Chen, Xinlian Zhang, Xin Xing, Jingyi Ma, and Michael W Mahoney. Asymptotic analysis
of sampling estimators for randomized numerical linear algebra algorithms. The Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 23(1):7970–8014, 2022.
[123] Odile Macchi. The coincidence approach to stochastic point processes. Advances in Applied Probability,
7(1):83–122, 1975.
[124] M. W. Mahoney. Randomized algorithms for matrices and data. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning.
NOW Publishers, Boston, 2011.
[125] M. W. Mahoney. Approximate computation and implicit regularization for very large-scale data analysis. In
Proceedings of the 31st ACM Symposium on Principles of Database Systems, pages 143–154, 2012.
[126] M. W. Mahoney. Lecture notes on randomized linear algebra. Technical Report Preprint: arXiv:1608.04481,
2016.
26
[127] M. W. Mahoney. Lecture notes on spectral graph methods. Technical Report Preprint: arXiv:1608.04845, 2016.
[128] M. W. Mahoney and P. Drineas. Structural properties underlying high-quality randomized numerical linear
algebra algorithms. In Handbook of Big Data, pages 137–154. CRC Press, 2016.
[129] M. W. Mahoney and L. Orecchia. Implementing regularization implicitly via approximate eigenvector computation.
In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 121–128, 2011.
[130] C. H. Martin and M. W. Mahoney. Implicit self-regularization in deep neural networks: Evidence from random
matrix theory and implications for learning. Technical Report Preprint: arXiv:1810.01075, 2018.
[131] P.-G. Martinsson. Randomized methods for matrix computations. In M. W. Mahoney, J. C. Duchi, and A. C.
Gilbert, editors, The Mathematics of Data, IAS/Park City Mathematics Series, pages 187–230. AMS/IAS/SIAM,
2018.
[132] Per-Gunnar Martinsson and Joel A Tropp. Randomized numerical linear algebra: Foundations and algorithms.
Acta Numerica, 29:403–572, 2020.
[133] J. Matousek. On variants of the Johnson–Lindenstrauss lemma. Random Structures and Algorithms, 33(2):142–
156, 2008.
[134] X. Meng, M. A. Saunders, and M. W. Mahoney. LSRN: A parallel iterative solver for strongly over- or
under-determined systems. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 36(2):C95–C118, 2014.
[135] Xiangrui Meng and Michael W. Mahoney. Low-distortion subspace embeddings in input-sparsity time and
applications to robust linear regression. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’13,
pages 91–100, 2013.
[136] Raphael A Meyer, Cameron Musco, Christopher Musco, and David P Woodruff. Hutch++: Optimal stochastic
trace estimation. In Symposium on Simplicity in Algorithms (SOSA), pages 142–155. SIAM, 2021.
[137] Aryan Mokhtari, Mark Eisen, and Alejandro Ribeiro. IQN: An incremental quasi-Newton method with local
superlinear convergence rate. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 28(2):1670–1698, 2018.
[138] R. Murray, J. Demmel, M. W. Mahoney, N. B. Erichson, M. Melnichenko, O. A. Malik, L. Grigori, P. Luszczek,
M. Derezi´nski, M. E. Lopes, T. Liang, H. Luo, and J. Dongarra. Randomized Numerical Linear Algebra – a
perspective on the field with an eye to software. Technical Report Preprint: arXiv:2302.11474v2, 2023.
[139] Cameron Musco and Christopher Musco. Randomized block krylov methods for stronger and faster approximate
singular value decomposition. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
[140] Cameron Musco and Christopher Musco. Recursive sampling for the Nystrom method. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 30, 2017.
[141] Cameron Musco, Christopher Musco, David P Woodruff, and Taisuke Yasuda. Active linear regression for lp
norms and beyond. In 2022 IEEE 63rd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages
744–753. IEEE, 2022.
[142] Cameron Musco and David PWoodruff. Sublinear time low-rank approximation of positive semidefinite matrices.
In 2017 IEEE 58th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 672–683. IEEE,
2017.
[143] Mojmir Mutny, Michał Derezi´nski, and Andreas Krause. Convergence analysis of block coordinate algorithms
with determinantal sampling. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 3110–
3120, 2020.
[144] Sen Na, Michał Derezi´nski, and Michael W Mahoney. Hessian averaging in stochastic Newton methods achieves
superlinear convergence. Mathematical Programming, pages 1–48, 2022.
27
[145] Deanna Needell and Joel A Tropp. Paved with good intentions: analysis of a randomized block Kaczmarz
method. Linear Algebra and its Applications, 441:199–221, 2014.
[146] Deanna Needell and Rachel Ward. Two-subspace projection method for coherent overdetermined systems.
Journal of Fourier Analysis and Applications, 19(2):256–269, 2013.
[147] Deanna Needell, Rachel Ward, and Nati Srebro. Stochastic gradient descent, weighted sampling, and the
randomized Kaczmarz algorithm. Advances in neural information processing systems, 27, 2014.
[148] Jelani Nelson and Huy L. Nguyên. OSNAP: Faster numerical linear algebra algorithms via sparser subspace
embeddings. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS ’13, pages 117–126,
2013.
[149] B. Neyshabur. Implicit regularization in deep learning. Technical report, 2017. Preprint: arXiv:1709.01953.
[150] Aditya Parulekar, Advait Parulekar, and Eric Price. L1 regression with Lewis weights subsampling. Approximation,
Randomization, and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques, 2021.
[151] M. Pilanci and M. J. Wainwright. Iterative Hessian sketch: Fast and accurate solution approximation for
constrained least-squares. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(53):1–38, 2016.
[152] Mert Pilanci and Martin J Wainwright. Newton sketch: A near linear-time optimization algorithm with linearquadratic
convergence. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 27(1):205–245, 2017.
[153] G. Raskutti and M. W. Mahoney. A statistical perspective on randomized sketching for ordinary least-squares.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(214):1–31, 2016.
[154] Elizaveta Rebrova and Deanna Needell. On block Gaussian sketching for the Kaczmarz method. Numerical
Algorithms, 86:443–473, 2021.
[155] Anton Rodomanov and Dmitry Kropotov. A randomized coordinate descent method with volume sampling.
SIAM Journal on Optimization, 30(3):1878–1904, 2020.
[156] V. Rokhlin, A. Szlam, and M. Tygert. A randomized algorithm for principal component analysis. SIAM Journal
on Matrix Analysis and Applications, 31(3):1100–1124, 2009.
[157] Vladimir Rokhlin and Mark Tygert. A fast randomized algorithm for overdetermined linear least-squares
regression. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(36):13212–13217, 2008.
[158] F. Roosta-Khorasani and U. Ascher. Improved bounds on sample size for implicit matrix trace estimators. J.
Foundations of Computational Mathematics (FOCM), 15(5):1187–1212, 2015.
[159] Farbod Roosta-Khorasani and MichaelWMahoney. Sub-sampled Newton methods. Mathematical Programming,
174:293–326, 2019.
[160] Daniel Rothchild, Ashwinee Panda, Enayat Ullah, Nikita Ivkin, Ion Stoica, Vladimir Braverman, Joseph
Gonzalez, and Raman Arora. Fetchsgd: Communication-efficient federated learning with sketching. In
International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 8253–8265. PMLR, 2020.
[161] Mark Rudelson and Roman Vershynin. Hanson-Wright inequality and sub-gaussian concentration. Electronic
Communications in Probability, 18, 2013.
[162] Alessandro Rudi, Daniele Calandriello, Luigi Carratino, and Lorenzo Rosasco. On fast leverage score sampling
and optimal learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31, pages 5672–5682. 2018.
[163] Alessandro Rudi, Luigi Carratino, and Lorenzo Rosasco. Falkon: An optimal large scale kernel method. Advances
in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
28
[164] Tamas Sarlos. Improved approximation algorithms for large matrices via random projections. In Proceedings of
the Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS ’06, pages 143–152, 2006.
[165] G.W. Stewart. On the perturbation of pseudo-inverses, projections and linear least squares problems. SIAM
Review, 19:634–662, 1977.
[166] Thomas Strohmer and Roman Vershynin. A randomized Kaczmarz algorithm with exponential convergence.
Journal of Fourier Analysis and Applications, 15(2):262–278, 2009.
[167] J. A. Tropp. An introduction to matrix concentration inequalities. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning.
NOW Publishers, Boston, 2015.
[168] S. Wang, A. Gittens, and M. W. Mahoney. Sketched ridge regression: Optimization perspective, statistical
perspective, and model averaging. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(218):1–50, 2018.
[169] Yining Wang, Hsiao-Yu Tung, Alexander J Smola, and Anima Anandkumar. Fast and guaranteed tensor
decomposition via sketching. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
[170] Christopher K. I. Williams and Matthias Seeger. Using the Nyström method to speed up kernel machines. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 13, pages 682–688. 2001.
[171] David P Woodruff. Sketching as a tool for numerical linear algebra. Foundations and Trends® in Theoretical
Computer Science, 10(1–2):1–157, 2014.
[172] P. Xu, J. Yang, F. Roosta-Khorasani, C. Re, and M.W. Mahoney. Sub-sampled Newton methods with non-uniform
sampling. Technical Report Preprint: arXiv:1607.00559, 2016.
[173] Fan Yang, Sifan Liu, Edgar Dobriban, and David P Woodruff. How to reduce dimension with PCA and random
projections? arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00511, 2020.
[174] J. Yang, X. Meng, and M. W. Mahoney. Implementing randomized matrix algorithms in parallel and distributed
environments. Proceedings of the IEEE, 104(1):58–92, 2016.
[175] Jiyan Yang, Yin-Lam Chow, Christopher Ré, and Michael W Mahoney. Weighted SGD for lp regression with
randomized preconditioning. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(1):7811–7853, 2017.
[176] Zhewei Yao, Amir Gholami, Kurt Keutzer, and Michael W Mahoney. PyHessian: Neural networks through the
lens of the Hessian. In 2020 IEEE international conference on big data (Big data), pages 581–590. IEEE, 2020.
[177] Zhewei Yao, Amir Gholami, Sheng Shen, Mustafa Mustafa, Kurt Keutzer, and MichaelWMahoney. AdaHessian:
An adaptive second order optimizer for machine learning. In proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
intelligence, volume 35, 2021.
[178] Rui Yuan, Alessandro Lazaric, and RobertMGower. Sketched Newton–Raphson. SIAM Journal on Optimization,
32(3):1555–1583, 2022.
29