Page | 1
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
Week 4 - Transcript
Video 1: Probability and Random Variables
Continuing our journey in the basics of mathematical topics, now we have come across a very important concept which is a probability theory. So, this is one of the very prominent concept or mathematical topic for any of the machine learning and deep learning concepts that are associated.
So, basically we will look into the first why the probability theory is considered as one of the fundamental aspects for this machine learning concepts and then we will look into the some of the key things about the random variables and random processes and the probability theory which is applied on the different type of the random variables and then we will relate it to the concepts that is associated by the machine learning and algorithms.
So, the most importantly we will look into first what is called as the probability and random variables. Basically, we will spend some time to understand why this probability and random variables are considered forms some kind of a central position in designing the algorithms for the machine learning and deep learning techniques.
So, basically when we talk about the probability and random variables, the key concepts the field of the probability that deals with is what is called as the uncertainty. This uncertainty when it comes to the data science and then analysing the data on to the concern with this uncertainty arises due to the noise in the measurement of the features from the data or the variability the data that's having or it is also because of having the finite size of the data sets.
For example, consider this set of data where we have a certain sequence of images of the different species of animals have been given. Basically, the task is to identify which animal it is. So, basically it's an image classification this task is concerned with. But if you look into it with every animal species here, none of the images are of the same or none of the images are similar. There is a lot of variations that is there. Their pose is different, background is different and illuminations are different. This is what we call variability that is present in the data.
Because of these variability sometimes even for the humans also it is difficult to identify whether it's really that particular object or not. This is what we typically we call it as a kind of a within the class a lot of variability that is existing there. That's what is called the intra-class variability. And in another scenario if you look into the each column wise the images if you look into this here this is here the typical images we typically called it as a the scene images okay where we are trying to classify them. But if you see here at each of the columns that indicate in certain categories which these images are belongs to.
But here here also within the category there are a lot of variations are there and at the same time across the categories classes there's a lot of similarities that do exist. That is what we call it as
Page | 2
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
intra-class similarities. This arises some sort of a confusions in deciding to which class it belongs to. All these things that arises some kind of uncertainty in deciding to which category they belongs to.
That's exactly the reason why where they're doing the classification when we want to predict a particular category to which the data is belongs to. So we are not able to predict it with a certainty saying that okay this is this particular class. We always assign some sort of a probability into this and say that this particular object belongs to a particular category with some probability of 0.7 or with probability 0.8 it belongs to this particular category.
This is similar scenario it happens specifically when we build the machine learning algorithms to build a biometric system where we try to verify and identify a person based on his biometrics. We did say the biometrics so either using the through the face recognition or through the fingerprint analysis or through the speech recognition okay. So in all these cases are not in a position to certainly say that okay this particular face belongs to a particular person. We always associate some sort of a confidence.
We always identify this faces or the person with some confidence. When we put some threshold onto this confidence and we say that okay then with this confidence this is a person is really a person which we were looking for. So all these things what we call this kind of a variability that is over there we need to have some kind of a framework or some kind of a concept that is required to handle this uncertainty that is presented.
So this probability theory is such a concept which provides a kind of a consistent framework for quantifying such an uncertainty and manipulating this kind of an uncertainty okay. That's exactly the reason why it forms a central foundation for the machine learning and deep learning concepts.
So basically all these things are rooted at the probability and random variables and why we call it as a random variable because each pattern we are trying to discover from the data they consider to be as a realisation of some experiments basically some kind of a process we call it generally we call this as a random process and typically a random process is a function of.
As an example if you consider the data of the human being okay when we say a data of human being all sort of humans the children the elders and the different kind of the humans for the different ethnics and all these things come under that. Now we can say that all these things have some sort of a commonalities and every human being we can consider as a realisation of the random process called the human beings and when you start processing the data of the human being a lot of common information interesting information comes into it will be revealed okay and those common information we typically call it as a invariant property.
For example every human being has some height and some kind of a weight and there's some sort of a relation between the height and the weight right and at the same time and there's some
Page | 3
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
kind of a common characteristic we look into the face and every human being has some common characteristics of the face that means every face has two eyes and a nose and mouth and mouth and all of them have some specific positions in which they are there. Of course there is a variations among the various instances of the human beings but all of the human beings has some common characteristics like eyes are there ears are there the nose and mouth and they are in the specific positions with specific measurements and all those things associated to that and at the same time take another example of the data of the iris flower.
So if you look into every flower now we can say that it's a realisation of the common random process which is called as iris flowers. So when you process this some of the invariant properties that exist over there like each of the flowers has the sepals they have the petals there's a specific relationship between sepals and the petals and each of them has a colours there's a combination of the relationship exists with the particular species with respect to that particular colour all these invariant properties usually they govern with certain probability rules.
That's exactly the reason why to process such a data the probability and random processes or random variables play a very important role and the central foundation for processing this and entire concept of the we call it as a machine learning or the pattern recognition and the deep learning they all are involved in the processing such a data and which involves a lot of uncertainties and a strong concept is lot of uncertainties and a strong concept is required in order to handle them that is nothing but the probability and random variables. That's exactly the reason why the importance of the probability and random variable comes in.
Video 2: Basics of Random Variables
So, having known that the importance of this probability and random variables, let us move on to try to understand what is the random variables and what are the different kind of the random variables are.
And since we are dealing with the data, how exactly these random variables are related to the data.
So, we will see this concept of the random variables in the perspective of the pattern recognition of the machine learning, basically the data processing concepts.
So, that is where we look into some basic concepts related to the random variable we try to see.
Now, when we say a random variable, the first question that comes to what is this random variable? Is it a variable? Is it a function? Right.
So, this is one of the common mistake the people do. The moment we say the random variable, the people say that, okay, it is a variable taking some values. That is a common mistake. Everybody does that.
Page | 4
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
But actually, the random variable is not a variable. Basically, it is a function. It defines what is called as a mapping from the sample space to the rank space.
We are processing the data and the entire data belongs to the circle space. And this random variable, basically, if you have some kind of sample space, yes, so this random variable, it is a function that maps a specific characteristic that is governing on the data on to what is called as the range space.
In this particular case, the X, what I am representing here is a random variable, basically maps a particular function that is governing on the sample space and that is mapped on to the range space SX that is indicating what is the range of values this particular random variable is going to take.
All right.
So, in general, as I was mentioning, it is a function that defines a specific property which is operating on the data in the sample space. That is an important aspect of what the random variable is considered.
So it can take several possible values and when it takes several possible values, some probability is associated with each of the values they take.
So that is exactly the reason why the probability is associated with that. Depending upon the type of the values these random variables can take, so there are two types of the random variables. One is what is called as the discrete random variable and another one is what is called as the continuous random variable.
Let us try to understand what is discrete random variable and continuous random variable before getting into the applying lot of probability theory on to these random variables.
Now let us first look into the discrete random variable. As the name itself suggests, so the discrete random variable deals with, basically it takes the values which are discrete in nature.
Before that, mathematically when we denote a random variable which is a discrete in nature, so this is typically represented with respect to that of what is called as an uppercase letter as we see here.
The X, uppercase X, what I am representing here is a mathematical notation for the discrete random variable and this discrete random variable takes the discrete values.
For example, let us try to understand this with an example. In the first example, let us consider the tossing of a coin. Usually when I toss a coin, the possible outcome will be either we get a head or a tail.
Page | 5
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
And usually when we do this tossing of a coin, we would not be doing it formally one time, we do several times, that means we do an experimentation and each experiment is a tossing a coin.
Now my sample space is a sample space of coin toss experimentation. So, now if this is the sample space is a coin toss, now I can define several random variables on that.
As I define the random variable as the function that operates on the data, that characterises a specific property of the data.
So, let me define one of the discrete random variable IH and it is defined as the head, that means it is associated with the outcome of the toss is being a head.
So that means that since it is a discrete random variable, this indicator random variable IH, it can take the value 1 or 0. It takes the value 1 when the outcome of the toss is results into 1, sorry outcome of the toss is head and it takes the value 0 if it is not head.
This is one random variable. So, as I was mentioning here, this random variable, it characterises a specific property of the data. What is the specific property of the data? The outcome of the coin toss experimentation being a head.
Let me define another random variable IT, which corresponds to the outcome of the toss is being a tail, that means this random variable takes the value 1 if the outcome of the toss is tail and if it takes the value 0 if it is not tail.
This is another random variable which characterises the specific property of the data, which is being a tail.
This is one of the examples.
So here, both the random variables take very discrete values, only the 0 and 1, that is what is the case.
And let us take another example, try to understand this.
That is, let us consider the data of the human beings and now my entire sample space is having the space of the human beings.
So as a discrete random variable, let me define one of the random variable, indicator random variable, let me call it as IA and what it defines is that the human being above the 18 years.
That means that this particular random variable defines characteristics of the human being is being an adult.
That means that this random variable is going to take a value 1 if the person is an adult, otherwise it takes the value 0.
Page | 6
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
And let me define another random variable IC, which defines a person being a child. That means captures the characteristics, what it defines the characteristics of the data is that if the human being is below the 18 years of age, then this particular random variable defines or characterises that.
And this random variable IC takes a value 1 if the person is a child, otherwise it takes a 0.
Again, in this particular case also, it is a discrete random variable taking the value 0 or 1.
These are the only two possibilities this random variable can take.
So that is exactly the things what we talked about discrete random variable.
It does not mean that it always it used to take the 0 and 1 only, it can take some n number of values, but n number of discrete values it can take.
To understand this, let us take another example, which is we call this as a in this particular case.
So let us consider a box having the several objects and now my sample space is the space of the objects.
So all possible objects are there in my sample space.
Now one of the random variable which I define on this sample space of the objects is what is called as a colour of the object.
Let X be that random variable which defines the colour of the object.
Now this colour of the object, it can take some different number of different values and these values being a colour will be assigned to that.
For example, the red, green and blue are the three values that this random variable can take.
That means that one of the three values this random variable can take here.
So that is what I am representing that the function maps out to the real space, the range of the values what it takes is only the three, one of the three values it can take.
Let me define another random variable Y, which defines the shape of the object.
For example, in this particular case, let the shape be this sphere or let the object is having the shape of cube.
These are the two possible values this random variable can take.
So this is exactly the kind of an example which defines what is this, the discrete random variable.
Altogether what we saw is that discrete random variable, it takes the discrete values.
Page | 7
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
Basically each of these random variable defines certain characteristics that is governing on the data in my sample space.
This is about the discrete random variable.
Now coming to what is called as the continuous random variable.
So this continuous random variable are mathematically denoted by the smaller case letter.
Here the smaller case X denotes one of the random variable, unlike the discrete random variable where it is denoted by the capital X.
And unlike the discrete random variable, this continuous random variable takes any real values from the continuous range.
So, for example, let us consider the data of the human being.
Now let us consider the same space of the human being, where all the human beings in the world are there in that sample space.
Now let me define one continuous random variable in that sample space of the human being.
And that random variable defines what is called as the height of the person.
Now, if you look into the height of a person, he cannot have a discrete value as a height of a person.
It can be some continuous value it can take.
Now when you map the continuous random variable onto the line space which defines the height of a person, and this height of a person always comes from some specific range, and that range is having the continuous values, range of the continuous values.
For example, if my human being sample space has the person from something around 3 to 4 years of age to 90 or 100 years of age, then typically in that age range, the people may have the height in the range from the 3 feet to something around the 7 feet.
That's why the range of the values, this height of a person, the random variable, continuous random variable height of a person can take is somewhere from the 90.0 to 210.0.
So when I say it's a continuous value, it may be either an integer value or it may be a fraction value or it's a combination of that.
That's the range what you are talking about.
And at the same time, on the same sample space, let me define one more random variable, let me call it as a Y, which defines the weight of a person.
Page | 8
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
This is a specific relation that exists for every human being between the height and the weight.
So as the height increases, the weight also increases.
That's a typical relationship that's existing over there.
But of course, each of the human being has their own height, their own weights.
So typically when we look into the human being, the space of the human being, this particular random variable which defines the weight.
So it may take the weight somewhere from the range of 20 kg to 120 kg.
So that is the continuous range between which the weight of a person, this particular random variable can acquire the value.
This is one of the examples for the continuous random variable.
Before going to another example, if you recall that we have seen the data set of the human being represented as the height and the weight of a person.
So if you recall that and if you see that, every row here indicating one person was represented with the height and the weight.
So now if you really see, related to this here, every column which indicates the height of a person, that is indicating this particular attribute, is one such continuous random variable which is defining the specific characteristics of a human being, which is nothing but the height of a person.
So similarly is the weight here.
And let's take another example which we have seen earlier, which is what is called as the iris flower data.
So here the sample space is this sample space of the iris flowers.
And now when I try to define a random variable here, so every flower has some sepal and petal and each of them has some kind of a length and width of those things.
One of the continuous random variables I am defining here is the sepal length.
So at this sepal length may take some continuous range from 4 centimetres to 7.5 centimetres.
So this is what I was talking about.
So this continuous range what I am talking about here is that, so they are not taking a very deterministic values here, it is like some random values between this particular range which is a continuous in nature, so that is why it is a continuous random variable.
Page | 9
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
Let me define another random variable which defines the sepal width.
It may take the range of the values from 2 centimetres to 4 centimetres.
At another random variable I can define on the iris flower, in the sample space of the iris flower, it is what is called as the petal length.
Let that be defined as the random variable U and that random variable U takes the range of values from 1 centimetre to 5.5 centimetres.
Similarly, another random variable V has been defined to represent the petal width and then that may take the range of the values somewhere between 0.1 centimetres to 2.5 centimetres.
When you relate this random variable with respect to the data what we have seen earlier, every column here representing one attribute of this particular data set and these attributes or the features typically they represent one random variable and depending upon the type of the values they are taking, either they are continuous random variable or they are the discrete random variable.
So that is what I was representing here.
Each feature or the attributes computed from the data is corresponding to one random variable.
So this is what is the relation of the random variable in the context of the machine learning when we are dealing with the data at hand.
So this is about the very fundamentals about the random variable and what is random variable and what is the different type of the random variable depending upon the values they are taking.
Video 3: Probability Theory on Discrete Random Variable
First, let us look into the probability theory on the discrete random variable, later we go on to the extend this to the continuous random variables.
Let us try to understand very fundamental aspects about the probability, what is we usually we call it as a probability of an event. That A be an event, we all dealing with the kind of an event is happening in the sample space and I will try to give, I am not just dry run over the mathematics over here, I will try to relate it, how it is related to our data, handling the data, manipulating the data and then processing in the machine learning aspect to that. So that is where we relation will be looking into that.
Let A be an event, something it is running on the sample space. Now the probability of the event A is usually denoted by P of A. As we are seeing here, the P of A, this is indicating what is called as the probability of this event A. How do we get this probability of event A? Usually we conduct several experiments, perform certain experiments to get the probability of an event. When I say performing an event, that means in the context of the machine learning where we are dealing
Page | 10
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
with the data, collecting every sample of a data is, we call it as a one experiment is concerned. Suppose we have n number of samples in my data set, so that means that I have performed n experiments to extract these samples. So that is exactly the things we are saying, where ns is the total number of experiments conducted in the sample space.
If the sample space is of the data of a specific nature, then ns will be the total number of samples that is present in that sample space or the data samples that is present there. Now, let na be the number of times the event has been occurred, then we define the probability of the event A as the na divided by the ns. That is, I have given here is that the na divided by ns is closely gives what is called as the probability of the event A. So why I am given this is a double tilde, not the equal to, exactly equal to is that we are dealing with what is called as the finite number of samples from the sample space. Suppose the ns, number of experiments conducted, the place number of samples collected is close to infinity, then this ratio of na by ns, it converges to the actual probability of that event. So that's a mean eval.
Now, one of the specific property of this probability is that it takes the value in the range between 0 to. Now suppose in my sample space, there are two events which are mutually exclusive in nature. When I say mutually exclusive, so basically these are the two events that is not happening jointly with each other. Whenever we are having the two events which are mutually exclusive, then we will be having an event A and event B and we can also compute what is called as the probability of the event A and probability of the event B.
Now once I compute the probability of the event A, then I can compute the probability of event B as the 1 minus the probability of A because we know that the probability of an event is in the range of 0 to 1. That's exactly the reason why the property what it says is that is the probability of these two mutually exclusive events, when they add up, the probability of event A plus the probability of event B should give 1. That's exactly the reason why in this particular case, the probability of the event B can be seen as 1 minus the probability of A.
Let us try to understand with some example here. Let us consider a simple coin toss experimentation. So here a coin has been tossed for 50 times. So that means that in my sample space, there are 50 times a coin has been tossed. That means that number of samples in that space is 50, ns is 50. And out of these 50 times the coin has been tossed, for some number of time a head has been occurred and some number of time the tail has been occurred. These are the only two outcomes.
Now if I relate this event with a random variable, so here if I define a random variable IH which defines the head, that is, it takes the value 1 if there exists a head, otherwise it takes the value 0. So when I say it's a probability of an event in the sample space and that event is basically related to something happening on this random variable itself. So when I say that event A which is the outcome of tossing is head, then it is nothing but the random variable IH taking the value 1. That
Page | 11
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
means that how many number of times, if I compute probability of this event A, that means what is the probability of the random variable IH taking a value 1. That is what it is going to do.
So suppose the head has occurred 20 times, that means that number of times the random variable IH taking a value 1 is 20. Now this is my, what is called as the NA, the number of times that event A has occurred. Now the probability of the event A, what is the event A? This is the occurring of the head, outcome of the toss is head. So this will be the NA by N, NA by NS. What is NA? The number of times the head occurred is 20 and then upon the 50 that leads to what is called as the 0.4. That is the probability of the occurring head in that sample space is 0.4.
Now here the only two outcomes are possible, one is occurring head and occurring tail and both of them are mutually exclusive because only one single coin we are tossing here. Now if I define the event B as outcome of the toss is being tail, now the probability of this event B will be 1 minus ep of A, that is 1 minus 0.4, that is 0.6. That is the probability of 0.6, the tail has been observed.
That is the meaning of the probability of an event and every event is associated with a particular random variable defined on that particular sample space. That is the things you need to relate.
In my sample space, suppose there are m mutually exclusive events that is there, A1, A2, A3, all the way up to Am number of mutually exclusive events are there. Then if I compute the probability of the event A1, probability of the event A2 and the way the probability of the event A1, then if we do the sum of all these probability of the events A1, A2, A3, so it should be equal to 1. That is the property which has to possible.
So just to understand that, there is another example. So here we are dealing with what is called as the experiment of picking a ball. Now, in my sample space, there are 100 balls are there. That means that Ns, the number of experiments or the number of samples in that space is 100. Now, among this 100 samples, 100 balls, there are 10 balls which are red in colour, 35 balls are in green colour and then 55 balls are in blue colour. So that means that there are, now if you really see that, one of the characteristics I wanted to define here is the colour of the ball. A discrete random variable X has been defined on the colour of the ball.
Now what will be an event? One of the event what I am considering here is that a ball is being a red ball. That means that the random variable X taking a value red, that is R. Now when I define a random variable X which defines the colour of a ball, then the possible values random variable X is going to take is only one of the three values, either red or green or blue. Now my event is that the ball is being a red ball. That means that the random variable associated with this event is that the random variable taking a particular value R or the red colour. So now how many number of red colours the ball is there? There are 10 number of red coloured ball is there.
See number of times the random variable X taking a value R is 10. Now with this we can say that a probability of an event is always the probability of a random variable taking a particular value. This is a key thing what we were trying to highlight here. Now with respect to this, if you see that
Page | 12
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
the probability of the event A is nothing but the probability of the random variable taking a value R is nothing but the 10 upon 100 that is the probability of 0.1.
Similarly the another event is a ball being a green ball. That means that the random variable X taking a value G. So here the number of green balls are 35. That means number of times the X taking a value G is 35. So here the probability of this event B that is random variable X taking a value G is 35 upon 100 that is 0.35 is the probability. Similarly the event C is the ball being a blue ball when the random variable X taking a value B. There are 55 blue balls are there that means the MC will be 55 and the probability of this event C will be 55 upon 100 this is the 0.5.
Now as we said so these are the three disjoint events that is occurring in this particular sample space and having the different probabilities associated to each of these events. Now if you add up all these events all these probabilities of all these events it adds up to 1. This is what the property it has to be satisfying. So this is what I was talking about the probability of an event. And we related the random variables that means the probability of an event is nothing but the probability of a particular random variable taking a particular value that is where we related it.
One of the important concept of the probability which we were always dealing with or interested here is what is called as a joint probability. As the name itself suggests the joint probability is nothing but it is a probability of events two events which occur jointly. That means there are two events that are occurring together. What is the probability of those two events occurring together that is what is called as the joint probability. Let A and B are the two events in my sample space and these two events are occurring jointly let us consider that. Let Ns be the total number of experiments conducted in my sample space that is total number of samples in that sample space. And NaB is the number of times these two samples A and B are occurring jointly. Then this joint probability for these two events A and B is given as basically it is denoted as probability of A, B this is indicating that event A and event B are occurring jointly and it is defined as the ratio of NaB to the Ns. So NaB indicating the number of times the two events A and B are occurring jointly upon the total number of samples in my sample space.
So as I have already mentioned an event is usually associated with a random variable which is taking a particular value. When we have the two events occurring jointly then definitely there are two random variables taking a specific value at the same time. What is the joint probability associated to that that is what we will be looking at. That is where we are trying to see the joint probability with respect to the two random variables we are talking about. So when I say an event A let X be a random variable this is associated with that event A taking a particular value and then let event B be a random variable Y taking a particular value. Now since both X and Y are the discrete random variable we are talking about the joint probability can be referred to as the probability of these two random variables taking a particular value at the same time. That is what is the case.
Page | 13
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
Now when we say a particular value a random variable X can take Nx possible values one of the Nx possible discrete values and similarly the random variable Y can take some Ny number of discrete values. Now the joint probability between the two random variables X and Y it can be defined as the probability of X taking a particular value Xi and Y taking a particular value Yj that is what is defined as the joint probability and it can be defined as the number of times these Xi X taking the value Xi and Y taking the value Yj jointly that is what is indicated by the Nij upon the total number of samples in my sample space. So basically Nij indicating the number of times the X taking the value Xi and Y taking a value Yj a particular value jointly that is what is the definition of this joint probability.
Now as an illustration let us try to understand this with an example. So for this let us consider the voice walks with the several objects and one of the random variable X is defined on the colour of the object and let the colour may be red green or blue R G or B are the three possible values this random variable X can take and another random variable is defined on the shape of the object and here the shape of the objects like sphere and the cube are the two possible values this random variable Y can take it in time.
So for the sake of understanding the distribution of these objects with the different colour and the different shape is given in this particular grid. So if you pay attention to this particular grid here when the X taking a one of the three values X1 X2 X3 are the three possible values X1 can take the X1 being a colour red X2 being a colour green and X3 being a colour B and at the same time the random variable Y defining the shape so it may take the two random variables two values Y1 and Y2 Y1 being a S indicating the sphere shape of the object and Y2 may be the C indicating the cube as an object.
Now you can see here the each column indicating that the 18 here is indicating number of objects which are red in colour of the shape sphere and this 12 is being the number of objects which are green in colour and which are in the shape of sphere. Similarly here the 16 indicating number of red objects of the shape cube. The X that it has been defined over there and that is exactly the reason why we call this as a this particular cell of a grid as a N11 indicating that number of times the random variable X taking the first value that is R and the random variable Y taking the value Y1 that is N11 that is the number of times the colour is red with the shape S.
Similarly this one indicating the N21 indicating that the random variable X taking the value X2 and the random variable Y taking the value Y1 that is why N21. Similarly here N31 indicating that X taking the value X3 and Y taking the value 1 and then this is the N21, N12 indicating that random variable X taking the first value R and then the random variable Y taking the value the second value Y2. And this is the N22 indicating that X taking the value X2 and Y taking the value Y2 and and this one indicating the number of times the x taking the value 3 and then y taking the value 2. This is jointly taking the value, so this is what is the indication. Now if you add up all these
Page | 14
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
numbers, it gives the total number of objects that is present in my sample space. It turns out to be 100.
Now with this, let us try to define this, let us try to compute this joint probability between these two random variables x and y. So as by definition, it is given as what we are seeing here. If I consider a particular value x1 when it takes, random variable x takes and then y2 is the, y1 is the value the random variable y takes, that is P of x is equal to x1 and y is equal to y1, that means that the colour of a object is red and the shape of the object is s. That is, we wanted to find the probability of the red colour sphere object, that is what we wanted to do that. And as a result, what is that, it is indicating, basically it is the number of times the red colour sphere object that is occurring upon the total number of samples. That is, one turns out to be the n11 by ns, n11 is 18, 18 out of 100, this is nothing but the probability of 1 8 time this red colour sphere object is present in my sample space.
Similarly if I go for the another value variable is taking, my x is taking the x1 itself and y is taking the another value y2, that means it is nothing but the probability of red colour object having the shape cube. This is nothing but the n12 upon ns, so n12 is nothing but the 16, 16 out of 100, it is the probability of 0.16. Similarly if I take the x taking the value x2 and y taking the value y1, that means that probability of green coloured ball having the shape sphere, this is n21 upon ns, this turns out to be 12 out of 100 which is 0.12.
And like this we can compute the probability, joint probability between a specific value each of the random variables can take, you can do it for all possible values they can take. So the next one is where the joint probability of the green ball having the shape cube which is turns out to be 0.2 and the joint probability of the blue ball having the shape sphere it turns out to be a probability of 0.3 and then the last one is the blue ball having the shape cube and this probability turns out to be 0.04.
So if you pay attention to these 6 different joint probabilities what we have seen, here these are the 6 possible ways both the random variables can take a particular value. And an interesting thing is that if you sum the collection of all these joint probabilities on the all possible combination of the values these 2 discrete random variables take, they add up to 1. So this is what we are seeing here. So now this is what is the joint probability for all possible, 6 possible ways of both the random variables taking the values is being given. If you add them up it gives the total probability of 1. This is the property which has to be satisfied.
An interesting thing here is that, so now if you consider the collection of all these joint probabilities for all possible combination of the values the 2 discrete random variables take and this is referred as the joint probability distribution. Generally a joint probability distribution between the 2 discrete random variables X and Y can be given by the P of X comma Y. So this is one thing you need to pay attention here. When I say a distribution it indicates random all possible joint probability values for all possible combinations of the values both these random
Page | 15
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
variables are taking. But if you say that a joint probability it is a specific value of the X and Y occurring jointly so that is a probability value. So this is the what you say is the what you have to pay attention.
Now moving on another concept it is important here is what is called as the marginal probability of a random variable. This marginal probability of a random variable is referred as basically it is the probability of a random variable taking a particular value. There is no joint occurrence I am talking about here. This is let X be a random variable the probability of that random variable taking a particular value X I that is what is called as the marginal probability of that random variable. So if you recall so we defined that there are n X possible values a discrete random variable X can take. Now marginal probability of a random variable X can be defined as P of X taking a value X I. So this is the notation for the marginal probability of a random variable X.
But as we seen that there is a another random variable a Y it is also occurring jointly with Y. In that context so the Y may be taking n Y possible values for this random variable Y. Now when you talk about a marginal probability of a specific random variable X taking a particular value it is actually it is actually this particular random variable X can also jointly occurring with respect to the random variable Y. So basically this marginal probability of a random variable X can be given as the sum of the probability of a random variable X taking a particular value X for all possible values of the random variable Y can take and divided by the total number of samples in my sample space.
So basically it can be defined something like this marginal probability of X taking a particular value is defined as the numerator term indicating so you know that n i j is nothing but the number of times the random variable takes the value random variables X and Y takes the value X i and X j jointly. But when I am fixing a value X is equal to X i and this when a random variable X taking a value X i it can jointly takes all possible other values of the Y jointly takes with that okay it is the sum over all that it is what is called as this summation of n i j.
So if you move this n s on to this to the numerator itself because though it is a independent term than this summation so if you pay attention to this the term inside this numerator this is nothing but if you recall that this is the basically defined as the joint probability that X taking the value X i and Y taking a value Y j but it is summed over all possible values the Y can take so that is what is the thing. Basically marginal probability can be defined as the summation of the joint probability of that random variable taking a particular value on all possible value that another random variable can take okay that is basically this particular operation is called as the marginalisation operation so that the random variable X taking the n x number of possible values and the random variable Y taking n y possible values of Y.
Now the marginal probability of a random variable X can now be defined as the joint probability between x and y which is marginalised over all possible values of the random variable y. That is why the summation over all possible values the y j can take. That is the thing. Similarly, the
Page | 16
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
marginal probability of the random variable y can be defined as the joint probability between x and y which is marginalised over all possible values the random variable x can take. Here the summation is over all possible values the x i can take. This is what is called as the marginal probability is concerned.
So let us try to understand this with respect to an same example what we defined earlier. So now as per the definition the marginal probability of the x taking a particular value is the is basically it is the the joint probability of x taking a value x i which is marginalised over all possible values the random variable y is taking over there. Now if i consider that the random variable x taking a value x 1 that is the marginal probability of x taking a value x 1 it is in this particular case x taking a value x 1 that means that the we are talking about the x taking a value of the colour r. Now what it is indicating is that it is the probability that of the object being a red coloured object.
Now we know that the red coloured object may come in the shape of the sphere or it also can come in the shape of the cube that is a associated with the random variable y. So here i need to compute the joint probability when the x is taking a red colour the y is taking the the shape s and also when the x is taking the red colour y is taking the shape c. The sum of them together it is indicating the joint probability summed over the all possible values of the random variable s the random variable y. So the it is nothing but n 1 1 plus n 1 2 these are the this is the joint probability of the red coloured object coming with shape the sphere as well as with the cube and then divided by the total number of samples it turns out to be a probability of the 0.34 18 plus 16 divided by the 100.
Similarly the another for the other values of x if you consider that when the the joint prob the marginal probability of the random variable x taking the value x 2 the x 2 means it is the green coloured object. So again the green coloured object can come with the shape sphere or the cube okay we know that it is basically it is the the sum of the joint probability of the the red green coloured object coming with the object of the shape sphere as well as the object of the shape of the c that is the 12 plus 20 they are the sum of the joint probabilities and the divided by the total number of samples. So there is 100 it turns out to be 0.32 and similarly the at another value the x can take is the x is equal to x 3 that is nothing but probability of the marginal probability of the colour being the blue or blue coloured object okay. So here also the joint probability of the colour being blue with the shape sphere and c turns out to be 30 plus 4 upon 100 it just turns out to be 0.34 okay.
So now if you really see that this when you compute the marginal probability for a particular colour and there are three possible values a colour can take so all possible the marginal probability for a random variable x is the three in number okay. Now if I collectively consider these random variables it turn it gives what is called as the marginal distribution. Collection of the marginal probability of x taking all possible values associated with the all possible values of the
Page | 17
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
random variable y it will be giving the what is called as the marginal distribution and it will be denoted as the p of x indicating the basically all possible values the x can take okay.
The collection of all these marginal probabilities will give you what is called as the marginal distribution and it will be given as so basically it is the joint probability between the x and y which is marginalised over all possible values of y that is what is the marginal distribution for the random variable y. Similarly we can also define the marginal distribution for another random variable that is what we had here is the y okay it is basically the collection of the marginal probabilities of the y which is associated with all possible values of x okay. So basically it is given as the probability of the random variable y which is nothing but the the joint probability of the random variable x and y which is normalised it is marginalised over all possible values of x. So this is definition of what is called as the marginal distributions okay.
All these things will we will be frequently we will be using it while we are dealing with the statistical pattern recognition models at the at the later stages okay. These marginal distribution what we have discussed so far it leads to what is called as the sum rule of the probability what we seen is that so basically what we seen is that the marginal probability of a random variable x is the sum of the basically it is the sum of the joint probability of x and y sum over all possible values of y. So this is what is called as the sum rule of the problem. Similarly the probability of y can be given as the the probability of the random variable y is the summation of over joint probability of the random variable x and y which is summed over all possible values of x okay. So this is what is usually called it as a sum rule of the problem.
So now one of the important operations on the probabilities what we would be seeing or what we will be frequently going to see is what is called as the conditional. Remember we are all dealing with these operations or the probability operations on the discrete random variables okay. Later we are going for the continuous random variable. Do not forget that we are still working on the discrete random variables only.
Now as the name itself suggests the conditional random variables or the sorry conditional probability means it is basically it is the the probability of a random variable taking a particular value okay. If i leave it as at that level then it is called as the it is just a marginal probability distribution. But there is some condition applies on finding a probability of a random variable taking particular value. The condition is that the condition will be on the another random variable taking a particular value okay. That is why the resulting probability is called as the conditional probability.
Basically suppose x is a discrete random variable taking the different values n x possible values and let y be the another random variable taking the n y possible values okay. Now the conditional probability of a random variable x taking a particular value x i can be given as the the random variable y taking a particular value y. That means the probability of the random variable x taking
Page | 18
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
the value x i given that the y is taking a particular value y j okay. This is what is the definition of the conditional probability.
So interestingly this conditional probability of one random variable taking a particular value given the another random variable taking a particular value okay this is what is the conditional probability. It is defined as the joint probability of these two random variable taking those particular values divided by the marginal probability of the random variable in the conditional point. Probability of x taking a particular value x i given y taking a particular value y j it is nothing but the so this is indicating that both x and y are jointly occurring. That is what is the meaning of this conditional probability. I wanted to find the what is the probability that x taking a particular value what is the condition of condition of when i trying to find this i know that y is taking a particular value y j okay.
That means that it is nothing but the joint probability of x taking a particular value x i and y taking a value y j okay divided by the what is that divided by the marginal probability of the random variable in conditional part. What is that in the conditional part that is the y in the conditional part that is divided by the marginal probability of y taking a particular value y j. So this is the definition of a conditional probability okay.
So now if you really see this with reference to this particular definition now mathematically we represent with respect to this as i written. Now interestingly if you pay attention to this particular expression we already seen what is this joint probability and we also seen this is a specific thing it is the the marginal probability. So we know the the definition associated to them. So we know that this joint probability of x taking a particular value x i and y taking a value y j it is defined as the n i j by n s okay. We know that and at the same time the marginal probability of the y taking a particular value y j it is given as the summation of the n i j all possible value the x can take i is equal to 1 to n x upon the total number of signs right. So this is what we know that right.
Now with reference to this now if i define this condition probability okay now the numerator term which is the the joint probability will take the case of it is the ratio of n i j by n s and then the denominator term is the the n i j summation over all possible values of x upon the n s here the common term is n s. So if you cancel them out so this conditional probability can be written as the n i j divided by the the summation of n i j over all possible values of x okay. So this is with reference to the number of times these random variables taking a value x i and y j respectively.
Now applying this onto this illustration to understand this this conditional probability and applying to this definition now suppose if i want to find the probability of the random variable x taking a first value x 1 conditioned on the y taking the first value y 1. That means that what is the probability that my object is a red coloured object given that its shape is sphere okay all right. So that is nothing but the number of times the joint probability divided by the the marginal probability right. That is number of times the red coloured object as having the shape sphere
Page | 19
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
that is nothing but the n 1 1 cell of the grid divided by the divided by the what is the given given that my marginal probability of the y taking the value this shape is taking the value sphere.
That means that it is the marginalised over all possible values x can take. That means the joint probability the number of times the object is the red and the shape is s the number of times the object is green and having the shape sphere and number of times the object is colour blue with the shape sphere. All these three possible things has to be that is a jointly occurring the three times that is a marginalising over all possible values x can take. So now with respect to this if you sum this thing up the this conditional probability will be having the 18 is the number of times the object is red having the shape sphere upon the 18 plus 12 plus 30. So turns out to be 18 upon 60 this is the probability of 0.30 okay.
Similarly the conditional probability of the random variable x taking the second value x 2 given that the my random variable y taking the first value itself. What is the first value? It is the shape is the sphere itself. This is again the same thing. This is the n 2 1 indicating the number of times the green object having the shape sphere upon the how many number of time a green object can be having the shape sphere okay. So there are it can be a red colour or it can be a green colour or it can be a blue colour. It is a jointly occurring the things. So the n 1 1 plus n 2 1 plus n 3 1 put together it is the 60. So that is the 12 out of 16 indicating the 0.20.
Similarly the another conditional random conditional probability is the given the my random variable y is taking the value y 1 that is nothing but the y is a sphere and what is the probability that the x taking the colour blue okay. This is nothing but 30 upon the 18 plus 12 plus 30 60 that is 0.5 g.
Now you can see here is that the we have computed the conditional probability for x taking the multiple values. How many values it can take? At a time it can take three values. So I have the three conditional probabilities for x taking the different values of the colours given that my shape is a particular shape which is a sphere all right. Now if I collectively if I consider this it is nothing but a the conditional probability distribution okay for a specific value the random variable y you can take okay. So the conditional probability distribution of a random variable x given a particular value y j for a random variable y it can be defined as the collection of all the conditional probabilities for all possible values of x given a particular value of y j okay. So this is given as the the x given y taking a particular y okay. This is what is the conditional probability distribution.
Similarly one can also define a conditional probability distribution for the another random variable y. So this is for a condition on particular value x i taking for a random variable x okay. In this case there is nothing but the probability of y given x taking a particular value x i. The definition follows as the same as before okay. So this is what is associated with the conditional probability distribution specific to a particular random variable on the condition side condition on specific random variable specific value a random variable can take.
Page | 20
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
So this conditional probability density or the distribution leads to what is called as the product rule of the probability. We know from the definition of the conditional probability that a particular given a particular value a random variable y take okay the probability of the x is given as the joint probability of the x and y taking particular values upon the marginal probability of the y. Since this is the expression we have if we can move this conditional probability onto the left hand side here okay. So now I can rewrite this joint probability as the product of the conditional probability and the marginal probability of the y okay. Now this can also be true for the another way basically the same joint probability can also be expressed as the product of the conditional probability on y and the marginal probability of x.
This is mainly because we know that if we look into the conditional conditional probability which is conditioned on x okay it is again the joint probability upon the marginal probability of the x okay. So now these are the two forms of the joint probability we can take with respect to what variable on which the condition probability has been computed or on which it has been conditioned on. Now in both these expressions if you really see that basically we are trying to multiply the two entities here that is why this is what is called as the product rule of the probability. Basically this product rule of the probability states that the joint probability of the two random variable can be expressed as a product of the marginal probability of one of the random variable and the conditional probability of the another random variable which is conditioned on the same variable in the marginal property. So that is what is the product rule of the probability.
This product rule of the probability it leads to what is called as the Bayes rule which is one of the famous and most used rules for the formulation in the machine learning also. If you look into the in a simple form the product rule of the probability can be expressed in terms of the probability distributions. In a simple form basically as we saw that there are two forms of joint probability distribution can be possible. The first form says the joint probability distribution between the two random variables is the product of the conditional probability which is conditioned on y and the joint probability distribution of pi. Another one is the product of the p of y given x into p of x. And in both these cases the left hand sides are same. Now since the left hand sides are same this both this equation 1 and 2 it leads to what is called as the the conditional probability p of y given x into the p of x is equal to p of x given y into p of y.
Now if i move this p of x on the left hand side onto the right hand side itself so basically it goes to the denominator of the the right hand side. So now conditional probability p of y given x can now be expressed as the product of the conditional probability of x given y into the marginal probability of y and upon the probability of x. Now you pay attention to the denominator term p of x is nothing but a marginal probability. How do we define the marginal probability distribution? It is basically it is the joint probability between x and the random variable y which is marginalised over the y. That is what is the p of x comma y marginalised over y and this is what is the form we usually in the context of the discrete random variable we call this as a base rule.
Page | 21
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
Basically the base rule states the conditional probability of y given x is expressed in terms of the conditional probability of x given y multiplied by the p of y divided by the joint probability x comma y marginalised over all possible values of y. Later we can see when we are dealing with the classification problems usually we represent x as the data samples and y as the class label. So basically in the context of the classification problem we are trying to find the probability of a class for a given sample and this is one of the prominent things which we do in the Bayes classification model. Later we are going to see that the x which we are talking about though here is a single random variable we are taking here so this is going to be a kind of a vector of the random variable indicating the feature vectors and we are trying to estimate the probability of a class where this formulation of the base rule is going to play a very wild role. We are going to see later when we talk about the Bayes classifiers.
Now there is one important property that will be reflected here that is what is called as the statistical independent variable. So usually the two discrete random variables are said to be independent when the joint probability distribution is expressed as the product of the marginal probabilities of two random variables. That means the joint probability distribution of the x and y can be represented as the product of the marginal probability distribution between the p of x and the p of y. When this condition holds then we say that the two random variables are independent of each other. That means they are not dependent on each other. What does that mean?
Basically we know from the product rule that the joint probability can be expressed as these two forms. Now in order to hold this particular property that is p of x comma y is equal to p of x into p of y then if you pay attention to the first expression here. So then what it says is that from this you can see that p of x comma y equal to these two this aspect this can only be possible when the second term this conditional probability p of x given y should be equal to p of x. What does this mean? Basically whatever the value for any value the x can take a particular value xi irrespective whatever the value y can take this probability is equal to the p of x. This can only be possible if these two random variables are independent of each other.
So this is one of the important relations that we are going to make use in the various statistical machine learning algorithms which we are going to see at the latest stage. Just before a closing note we discussed all these things in the context of the discrete random variable and we also defined some of the probability distributions on this discrete random variable x. The p of x which is referred as that of the discrete distribution of the probability distribution right in the random variables. So in the context of this discrete random variable this probability distribution is actually referred as the probability mass function.
Later we are going to see in the context of the continuous random variable this probability distribution on the continuous random variable can be defined as the probability density functions. So this is in the context of that. All together we basically we looked into the specific
Page | 22
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
random variable which is the discrete random variable and various probability operations on these discrete random variables. We discussed about the marginal probability density, marginal probability distribution. We also discussed about the joint probability distribution, conditional probability distribution and how it is being computed. And later we are going to see apply the same concept can be extended to the continuous random variables also.
Video 4: Probability Theory on Continuous Random Variable
So, after looking into the probability theory on the discrete random variables, now let us extend the same theory on to the continuous random variables. So, here all the concepts which we discussed with respect to the discrete random variables, so will holds here, but with few changes associated with that, let us try to understand that. Unlike the discrete random variables, this continuous random variable which is denoted as a small letter, which takes the values from the real space, basically it takes the value, a real value from the continuous range, so it takes some kind of a set of real values.
As we have seen in the last class, last session, so where by considering the data from the human being, from the space of human beings, so one of the random variable we defined as the height of the person, and another random variable we defined as a weight of a person, where height of a person takes the values from the range 90 centimetre to 210 centimetre, and the weight of a person takes the range of the values from the range 20 kilo to 120 kilo. So, basically any sample of a human being is considered, when we measure the height of a person, so it may take any value in the range of 90 centimetre to 210 centimetre, that is what is the meaning here. So, that is exactly the reason where some difference comes with respect to when we talk about the probability theory in the context of the discrete random variables.
So when we talk about the discrete random variable, it makes sense that finding what is the probability, the discrete random variable taken for a particular value, but in case of the continuous random variable, it is not fair to say that, it is not meaningful to say the probability of a random variable taking a particular value, because at any instance there is an infinite possible values a random variable can take. So since the continuous random variable, probability of a continuous random variable p of x can take the values in a range, usually it forms what is called as a probability distribution. So basically, we have discussed previously that the probability of a discrete random variable, we call that as a probability mass function.
So in similarly here, in the context of the continuous random variable, probability of a random variable x, the p of x is known as the probability density function. It does not take a specific value, rather a density of the values it takes. Basically, it tells us that what is the density of the points, that is the values the continuous random variable can take in a particular interval. So when you talk about the probability density function, there is always a mathematical closed form expression will be associated with that. So it is not that an hypothetical one, there is one closed form mathematical expression will be associated with the probability density function.
Page | 23
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
So what we are interested here is that, where it is to find out what is the probability that a continuous random variable x can take in the interval a and b, when I say the interval a and b, it includes that a and b also, and that is what we want, we are interested in finding it. Basically, it is a probability of the x in the range a and b, that is what we are interested always. When we compute this value for this density, this obtained probability density value, it is obtained by integrating the probability density function with respect to dx across the range a to b. Basically, it is given as the integration of p of x dx over the range a to b.
So in that range, the density what it forms, that is what it indicates, that value indicates. Basically, we are trying to aggregate all the values a probability density can take in that particular range. That is what is the integration, it is indicating with respect to that. Most importantly, we always assume a closed form expression for the probability density function. So, after a few slides, we are going to see that what could be one of the, we are going to discuss one of the most commonly used probability density function, and what is its shape, and that is what we are going to see through.
So, like any of the probability rules, what we have discussed is the context of the discrete random variable, all those things are applicable even for the continuous random variables also. We discussed about the joint probability distribution in the context of the discrete random variables. So here, if x and y are the two continuous random variables, the joint probability distribution is given by the p of x comma y. One thing you should notice here that whenever we talk about the discrete probability distributions, we represent that with the capital P. You might have noticed in the earlier slide.
Now when we talk about the continuous random probability density associated with the continuous random variables, we represent them with the small p as a probability density function. So like we have discussed about the sum rule in the context of the discrete random variable, in the context of the continuous random variables also, the sum rule can be defined as the marginal density function of one of the random variables, say x, and it is obtained by marginalising the joint probability density function over the another random variable.
For example, p of x comma y is a joint probability density function with respect to x and dy indicating that the joint probability density function which is marginalised over all possible values say y can take. So this is going to give us the marginal density function for the random variable x. Similarly, the another marginal density function on the other variable y, p of y, can be obtained as the joint probability density function between the x and y which is marginalised over all possible values the x can take. And this, the main difference you are seeing here is that the summation in the discrete random variable is replaced with respect to the integration in this particular case.
Similarly to the sum rule, we also looked into the product rule. In the context of the continuous random variable, this product rule can be defined as the, basically it gives us the joint probability density function to a random variables x and y as the product of the conditional density function
Page | 24
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
of x given y and the marginal density function of x. Basically, the joint probability density function x comma y is given as the product of the two quantities. The two quantities are the conditional random conditional probability density function of x given y and which is multiplied with the probability of the y.
So similarly, we also have the another form of joint probability density. So basically the p of x comma y can also be written as the conditional probability of y given x multiplied by the p of x. The product rule in similar to that of what we seen with respect to discrete random variables. We also looked into one more property that is the independency between the two random variables. Two continuous random variables x and y are said to be independent when the joint probability density function p of x comma y can be expressed as the product of the marginal density functions of x and y as it is.
So this is the product of the marginal density function of x and the marginal density function of y that gives the independence property between the two random variables. So like the Bayes rule what we seen with respect to the discrete random variables even in the continuous random variable also the Bayes rule can be expressed basically as the conditional density function can be expressed in terms of the other conditional density function and the two marginal density functions. For example, if we are interested in finding the conditional density function of probability of y given x then it is expressed as the product of the conditional density function of x given y and the marginal probability of y divided by the marginal probability density function of the x.
So, in this expression we earlier we saw that this p of x is a marginal density function of the random variable x which is in turn expressed as the seen as the integration of the joint probability density function which is marginalised over all the values of x and by the product rule we know that this joint probability density function can be expressed as the conditional probability density between the conditional density function of x given y multiplied by the p of y with respect to y. So, this is what the Bayes rule one of the form of the Bayes rule.
Bayes another form of the Bayes rule that is the with respect to the another conditional density function p of x given y can be given as the product of the p of y given x into p of x divided by the p of y. To summarise, now looked into the probability theory on the conditional random variable. So, where we discussed about the we looked into the joint probability density function, marginal density function, conditional density functions, sum rule, product rule and as well as the Bayes rule in the context of the conditional density function. With reference to the discrete random variable what the changes we saw here is that all the summations in the discrete random variable is replaced with respect to that of the integration here. So, that is the important aspect we are talking about and mainly we call this as a density function because probability distribution is called as the density function because of we are dealing with respect to the continuous values in the specific range.
Page | 25
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
Video 5: Operations on Random Variables: Expectation Operation
Moving forward, let us look into the some of the key operations on the random variable. When we talk about the random variable, here we will be looking into the both applicable to both the discrete random variable as well as for the continuous random variable. One of the main operation which we wanted to see, basically a very important role in the context of the machine learning and deep learning is the expectation operation.
Let us start with respect to this expectation operation on the discrete random variable. Let X be a discrete random variable and X1, X2 up to Xn, X are the n, X possible values a discrete random variable X can take. Usually this expectation operation is usually denoted by a letter E followed by a opening and closing bracket, square bracket and between that the random variable X will be written that. Basically it is read as the expectation of a random variable X.
So, basically in the context of the discrete random variable case, this expectation of a random variable X is defined as the product of the random variable X taking a particular value Xi and the probability that the random variable taking a particular value Xi, that is P of X is equal to Xi. And this is summed over all possible values the random variable X can take. Mathematically denoting that, it is basically the product of the random variable X taking a particular value Xi and the probability of X, random variable X for a particular value X and it is summed over all possible value of X. It is generalised, it is written as P of X into X is summed over all possible values of X.
So, basically this expectation of X is referred as the mean of the random variable X and this is typically which is represented as the mu. For example, let us consider a random variable X taking the three possible values X1, X2, X3 where X1 may be 5, X2 may be 10 and then X3 may be 5. Now the probability of this random variable X taking the value 5 is something is given as a 0.4 and the probability of the random variable X taking the value 10 is given as 0.25 and the probability of the random variable X taking the value 15 is given as a 0.35.
Now with this, so the expectation of X basically it gives some sort of a mean of the random variable X. It is given as the product of the probability that the random variable X taking a particular value and that particular value itself and summed over all possible values. Basically 0.4 into 5 plus 0.25 into 10 plus 0.35 into 15 and summed up to 0.95. Basically it is some kind of a probabilistic sum of the values the random variable is taking, all possible random variable is taking. So and that is where we denote the mu or the mean as the expectation of X.
By hearing this mu or looking at this mean of the random variable X, we often compute the arithmetic average of the variables as a mean of the random variable. So now please do not get confused with respect to that. That arithmetic average is also called as a mean because there is a probability associated with every value that it takes. But in this arithmetic average case, the probability of the variable taking each of the possible value is uniformly the same.
Page | 26
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
That means when we consider that as when X taking a particular value X and also the P of X suppose is taking the value particular value of X right. So this is equiprobable. That is suppose we have nX number of examples are there, this 1 by nX what we are talking about it is the probability that a random variable taking a particular value. That means that it is an equiprobable for all the values the variable is taking. So that is the reason why it turns out to be mu is equal to 1 by nX summed over all the possible values of X can take. So that is nothing but the arithmetic average what we are talking about.
For the same examples, so when the X taking a one of the three values say X1 is 5, X2 is 10 and X3 is 5. Now if I consider there are three variables are there and all of them are equiprobable means 1 by 3 is the probability of X taking each of the values. So now if I consider this 1 by 3 multiplied by each one of the things, sum of each of the elements, so that turns out to be 10. That is actually the arithmetic average of these values what we are talking about.
So there is a relationship in general we call this mean as a expectation of the random variable because there is a probability that the value is taking that is also associated with that when we compute in the mean. That is why the expectation is the term that is an intuitive. And statistically this mean is termed as the first order statistical moment.
Now similar to the mean, the another operation which we are interested in which is result of this expectation operation is what is called as the variance. The variance is denoted by the letter that is sigma square. So basically the variance is defined as the expectation of the X minus mu whole square. So that is basically it is nothing but when I say it is an X minus mu whole square.
So this is basically it is talking about at any particular time if the X is taking a particular value how much it is deviating from the mean that is the mu which we know that it is the expectation of the random variable and the probability associated with that. So that is what the variance is associated with that. Basically it is talking about the product of the probability of the random variable and the X minus mu whole square and summed over all possible X that it takes.
So here this variance is termed as the second order statistical moment and most importantly what we are doing here is it is actually it is the X minus mu whole square means it is actually we are trying to do the squared deviation of the random variables from the mean. This X minus mu is usually we call it as a deviation of the value Xi taken by the random variable from the mean mu.
And usually this term the variance since it is modelling it is looking into the squared deviation of the random variable this deviation can either a positive value or negative value but we since we are taking the square of that the variance is always looking into the magnitude of the deviation of the value X from the mean and this is the indication of the spread of the data. Later we are going to see that it represents the spread of the data and associated variable with the variance is what is called as the standard deviation.
Page | 27
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
The standard deviation is nothing but it is the square root of the variance that means that the deviation what we are talking about it is nothing but the standard deviation which we talk about. Why it is standard? Because it is standard it is with respect to the mean the deviation we were looking into that.
So this is the another operations with respect to that the same operations the expectation operation can be extended to the continuous random variable also. So in the continuous random variable mean mu is considered as the expectation of the continuous random variable X. So here the X is a small x we are considering here. So now it is defined as the instead of the summation here it is the integration of the P of X into X with respect to the dx. So that is the mean of the thing.
Similarly the variance of the random variable continuous random variable X can be given as the it is basically expectation of the continuous random variable deviation of the continuous random variable X from the mean the squared deviation. It is basically now expectation of the X minus mu whole square it is given here as the integration of X minus mu whole square P of X into dx. P of X is indicating the probability density function with respect to X.
So as we discussed so here also the variance is a second order statistics and the what we interested here is the standard deviation which is the square root of the variance. Only difference with the respect to the discrete random variable is that there it is a summation if here it is the integration of the possible values we are taking.
One more operation which we were interested in here is that apart from the mean and the variance is what is what is called as the covariance. For this we need a two random variables. Let us discuss this in the context of the continuous random variable that X be a continuous random variable and Y is the another continuous random variable associative to that that mu X be the mean that is basically the expectation of the random variable X and sigma X square is the variance of the random variable X.
Similarly mu Y be the mean of the random variable Y and sigma Y square be the variance of the random variable Y. So now the covariance of the two random variable X and Y it is given as the it is denoted by the sigma X Y basically is the variance covariance the two terms we are bringing in here. So this covariance of the two random variables it is defined as the expectation of the product of the deviation of the random variable X from its corresponding mean and the deviation of the Y from its corresponding mean ok basically it is the expectation of X minus mu X into the Y minus mu Y that is what is giving you the covariance term.
It can be given as the integration of the X minus mu Y into Y minus mu Y joint probability density function P of X comma Y integrated with respect to the dx and dy alright. So this is the covariance term basically this covariance term indicates how the two random variables are related each other how much they are deviating with respect to the corresponding centres so that is what
Page | 28
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
reflects ok and this gives us to think about how these operations can be performed on the not just a single random variable on the multiple random variable ok.
Till now we have seen all the operation with respect to the single random variable now in reality we may have the multiple random variable ok for example let us start with respect to the discrete random variable consider that there are d number of discrete random variables are there let them be x1 x2 x3 up to xd now if I put together all these discrete random variables in the form of a vector and then the resulting vector is called as the discrete random vector this is a natural if you look into a data we have the multiple attributes associated to that when we know that each attribute or the feature it associated with one of the random variable now if you consider the entire one data sample as a vector of the attributes this is nothing but it is a vector of the random vector ok now this one random vector corresponding to your one data vector the case ok now in that context of the random vector if I compute the mean vector that is nothing but the expectation of the random vector it is nothing but the it is the vector of the expectation of the individual elements individual random variables of that particular and similarly the vector of the variance if we can seen as the it is a vector of the expectation of the x1 minus mu1 whole square expectation of the x2 minus mu2 whole square basically it is the expectation of the deviation squared deviation of between the each of the variables with respect to the corresponding variables corresponding mean now we can define a covariance term with respect to the every pair of random variables in my random vector how many random variables are there there are d such random variables are there and for every pair of random variables when I compute the covariance value then it turns out to be there are total d cross d random variables covariance values can be obtained with respect to that which results into a matrix called as the covariance matrix basically it helps in it shows the computing the covariance between every pair of the random variable so in that if you really see that first between every pair of element the expectation or the between the covariance between the same variable x1 and x1 if you consider that then it becomes the x1 minus mu1 whole square the expectation of that so this turns out to be the the variance of the first random variable x1 and next what you are seeing here is the expectation of the product of the deviation of the first random variable x1 with respect to its mean and the second random variable x2 with respect to the mean this is indicating your x1 sigma 1 2 covariance between the first random variable and the second random variable and this third element in the row it is nothing but the expectation between the deviation of the first random variable and the product with respect to the third random variable like that I have the expectation the the covariance between the first random variable with respect to the all the other random variables in that okay similarly the second row it is corresponding to that of the covariance of the second random variable with respect to the all other d random variable when you computing the covariance of the random variable with respect to itself it leads to what is called as the variance now the entire matrix if you see that it's a d cross d matrix it turns out to be an expectation of the outer product between the random vector x and the mean vector of the random vector so this results into what is called as the sigma matrix this is nothing but the covariance matrix where if you observe that
Page | 29
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
all the diagonal elements are the variances and off diagonal elements indicating the covariance associated to that one important property of this covariance matrix or the covariance operation is that the covariance matrix is a symmetric matrix that means that covariance between the random variable and the jth random variable is equal to that of the covariance between the jth random variable and the i th random variable so that's exactly the reason why sigma 1 2 is equal to that of the sigma 2 1 so like that so this all the upper triangular element which are there here same as that of the lower triangular element in my covariance matrix so that's exactly the reason why this covariance matrix is a symmetric matrix same rules that applies to the continuous random variables also so we can compute the mean vector of the continuous random vectors and variance vector and also the covariance matrix in the context of the continuous random variables can be applied and that can also be interpreted in the similar way as that of the discrete random variable all these things if you relate it to the real data when we were processing in the context of the machine learning and the deep learning concept so basically we are dealing with respect to the continuous random variables but each of the data points what we have is some kind of a finite number of data vectors will be available since our data set has some finite number of data set points let n be the number of data points is there in my data set each the data point xn is having the is a d dimensional vector it is nothing but having the d random variables okay it's a vector of d random variables since it is the finite number of samples so now my integration is considered as a kind of a summation and as a result so whatever the mean we compute with respect to the finite number of data samples we call it as a sample mean of the data vectors okay that mean vector it's given as the arithmetic average of the each of the data vector over all the data points what we are having here similarly the sample covariance matrix is computed as the outer product between the every sample with respect to the corresponding respect to the mean and is summed over all the samples n and then the divided by the 1 by n minus 1 so that is what leads to what is called as the covariance matrix okay so as we discussed earlier so each of the diagonal elements indicating the sample variance and then of diagonal elements indicating the sample covariance between the ith and jth okay so just to summarise here one of the key operations which you are interested on the random variables is the expectation operations which defines the mean and the variances so which are corresponds to the first order and the second order statistics which are very much important in various operations of the machine learning and deep learning which we were taking into the case.
Video 6: Normal or Gaussian Density Function
Now, with this we will move on to the very important concept in the probability theory, which is very much common in most of the many of the statistical pattern recognition techniques, which we will be seeing in the later part of the course. So, that is what is nothing but the normal density or the Gaussian density function. This is density function moment I say the density function, it is associated with the continuous random variables, and the probability of a continuous random variable is given by the density function.
Page | 30
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
And I also mentioned earlier that, when we talk about the probability density function, we assume a mathematical expressions associated with that. One of the most common density function, which we use in the context of the continuous random variable is the normal density or the Gaussian density function.
First, let us look into what is called as the univariate Gaussian density function. So, this Gaussian distribution or the Gaussian density function is a unimodal distribution. Unimodal in the sense, there is a one single peak or the single mode, which is at the centre of the data, that is exists for this shape of this distribution is considered. That is why the single mode or the single peak is there in that shape of the distribution.
And since this Gaussian density is, we are discussing over the single random variable, then such a Gaussian density function or the normal density function is called as the univariate Gaussian density. So, usually people get confused with respect to the unimodal and the univariate. Uni means single, univariate means the Gaussian density defined on the single variable, single continuous random variable. And unimodal means the density, which is having the single peak in the context of the Gaussian density, that peak is centred on the mean of the data.
So, mathematically the Gaussian density, this is actually the probability density function p of x, it is given as the notation n of x given mu comma sigma. That means, that the x is the random variable and the n is the Gaussian density function, given mu and sigma means, they are the parameters of the mean and the variance or the standard deviations, which are the parameters of the Gaussian density function, which defines this density function. And the mathematical expression for that is given as 1 by square root of 2 pi into sigma and exponential of minus x minus mu whole squared by 2 into sigma square. This is the equation of that.
Now, for all possible values of x, but it is given to this, this probability density function, Gaussian density function, it takes the form of a bell shaped form, where you can see that the peak is lying at the centre of the data or the mean of the things. So, in this particular case, mean mu is called as the expectation of the random variable x and sigma squared, which is the variance, which is the expectation of x minus mu squared.
Some interesting aspects about this Gaussian density function is that, if you see this sigma, what is called as the standard deviation, it basically, it controls the width of this bell shaped curve. Let us take an example here. So, I am showing here three different colours, showing the three different Gaussian density functions. It is a univariate Gaussian density function. The first one, the red one, what you are seeing here, this is, all these things, if you observe that, they all are centred at the 0, that is, the mean is 0.
Now, if you see here, the standard deviation of the red Gaussian density function is 0.1, this is small, right, the deviation is small. That means that, what is this sigma indicates, standard deviation, it is basically the deviation of any random variable in this range. It is, if you take that,
Page | 31
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
how much it is deviating from the centre. So, this is, turns out to be 0.1, it is. And if you take the black one, here the standard deviation is 0.5, it is a larger deviation. And then, the blue one has the standard deviation of 1.
If you observe here, as the standard deviation increases, or the spread of the data increases, the peak, height of the Gaussian density, or the peak, is started reducing. So, basically, what it says, the Gaussian density function, it says is that, the most of the data points are lies around the centre, that is the mean, and as the data moves away from the mean, the deviation, it increases. As the deviation increases, the peak value decreases.
So, just to understand this, so the, you are seeing that, the peak of this Gaussian density is at the mean. When the mean, when your data point X, take the value of mean, mu, what happens to this exponential term, that becomes exponential of the minus 0, this is nothing but 1. That means that, the probability density function for that value, that random variable X, taking the value equal to that of the mean, for that, the P of X value will be only this factor, that is 1 by square root of 2 pi into sigma. So that is the maximum value that it can take.
So, in this particular case, when the X value is 0, so, and the standard deviation is 0.1, ok, so at that time, P of X, taking the value, it is called as the 4, this is what you are seeing here, that is the maximum value that it takes. Now, if you observe, as the value of X moves away from the mean, whether it moves towards the positive side or towards the negative side, the exponential term will become smaller and smaller and as a result, the P of X value, what you are going to take, it becomes smaller and smaller, alright.
So, that is the slope of this particular thing is, becomes smaller and smaller. What exactly the things these three curves are showing here is that, if you see, if the standard deviation is very small, the deviation of the data points from its centre is small, then it will have the very, the peak will be very large and as the deviation increases, it reduces the peak, ok. When it reduces the peak, that means that the spread is also increasing.
Most important characteristics you can see here is that, if I take the integration of this random variable, probability density function over the dx and that always should be equal to 1. What does that mean? Basically, if I compute the Gaussian density function value for all possible values of X and if I integrate over it, integrate means, if I accumulate all of them, sum all of them, it should be equal to 1, alright. So, this clearly says that, if your spread is large, the integration of the P of X into dx irrespective of whatever the spread it is, it should be equal to 1.
Whether it is a blue curve or it is a black curve or the red curve, irrespective of that, all of them should have the total sum of all the probability density function values, what it takes for all possible values of random variable X. So, it should be equal to 1. That means that, area under the curve of the Gaussian density curve, bell shaped curve, what you are saying, it should be equal
Page | 32
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
to 1, right. So, that is exactly the reason why this Gaussian density is also called as the normal distribution or the standard distribution, alright.
Now, one more important aspect here is that, as I said, take this example here. So, here the standard deviation is 1, ok. That means that, from the centre, the deviation is at the unit distance here, the standard deviation is 1. That means that, this is what is the situation is called as the mu plus sigma situation and this is what is called as the mu minus sigma, ok.
Now, if you take this interval mu plus sigma to mu minus sigma and entire this area, what it is covering here, alright, so you can see here, the peak lies at the centre. That means that, what it indicates is that, the probability of X taking the value in this range, that is, mu plus sigma to mu minus sigma in this particular range, the probability of X taking the value is 0.68. That means that, around 68 percent of the values, the probability density function can take that lies in this particular range mu plus sigma and mu minus sigma, ok.
Now, if you take the mu plus 2 sigma, this is the place where we have the mu plus 2 sigma will be there and this is the mu plus, sorry, this is mu minus 2 sigma, it is on the minus side and this entire region, ok, this actually, it holds the probability of X coming in this particular region is 0.95. And similarly, if this is the things where I consider as mu plus 3 sigma in this range or mu 3 sigma, to consider this particular range, so here, the total number of, the probability of X taking the value in this range of mu plus 2 3 sigma and mu minus 3 sigma, it will be 0.997, that is, 99.7 percent of the values lies in this particular range, ok.
That means that, if you take a standard deviation, ok, which defines spread of the data, ok, so mu plus sigma, the deviation with respect to the centre, it holds almost 68 percent of the values that lies between that range, ok, and that increases as it goes to mu plus 2 sigma and mu plus minus sigma. And you should be remembering that, so we are dealing with continuous random variable, it is actually a integration from the minus infinity to infinity, this Gaussian density function ranging from the minus infinity to the plus infinity, alright.
So, even though it ranges infinite possible values, so around the 68 percent of the values, of the density value will lies in the range of the mu plus sigma and mu minus sigma, that is what is the meaning, what it is giving there, ok. So, this is with respect to the, the univariate normal density function, that is, with respect to the single random variable, but often we know that our real world data problems are of the multiple random variables will be there, ok.
The Gaussian density function, which is defined on the multiple random variables are called as the multivariate Gaussian density function or the multivariate normal density function, ok. So, here if we have the d number of random variables put together to form a random vector of having the d random variables, now probability density function of a random vector X, now it is given as X given the mean vector and the covariance matrix, and the mathematical expression for the Gaussian density for multivariate Gaussian density function is 1 by 2 pi to the power of d
Page | 33
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
by 2, where d indicating the number of the random variables and the determinant of the covariance matrix, basically it is the square root of the determinant of the covariance matrix multiplied by the exponential of the minus half into X minus mu transpose sigma inverse X minus mu.
So, this the X minus this term is what is called as the a particular distance, it is called as the Mahalanobis distance, here the mean mu is the mean vector and sigma is the covariance matrix. So, the most important thing is that this Mahalanobis distance is named as after one of the famous Indian statistician is called as the Prashanth Chandra Mahalanobis, he is considered as the father of Indian statistics, if you are heard about the Indian statistical institute Kolkata. So, he is the founder director of the Indian statistical institute of Kolkata. So, this distance is named after him, it is called as the Mahalanobis distance, which is a part of this Gaussian density function.
Basically, this Mahalanobis distance is basically it is a measure of the distance between a vector X to the distribution, basically it is a distribution means it is a set of all the data points, which is represented by the mean vector and the covariance matrix. Basically, suppose this is my data point X and these are my set of data points. So, each is also a vector in the d dimensional space, but this set of data points are represented by the mean vector and the covariance matrix. The distance of the vector X with respect to the set of the vectors, which are defined by the mean vector and the covariance matrix, this is what is called as the Mahalanobis distance.
When I say that a set of vectors, which are defined by the mean vector and the covariance matrix, it is nothing but all these data points coming from a Gaussian density function, that is exactly the reason why it is called as the distance from a point to the distribution.
So, just to understand in the multivariate scenario, how this well shaped Gaussian density function looks like. So, for that, suppose if I am having the number of the random variables is 2, that is the bivariate case, b means 2 variables case. So, in that scenario, if you really see that the shape of the Gaussian density, it looks like a well shaped curve. So, where if you do the cross section of this thing, we can see that there is a constant elliptical constant density contours, you are going to see that, which is having a variance in one direction and variance in the another direction, which is centred around the mean. So, this is the shape of the Gaussian density function in the 2 dimensional case. One can imagine in the multidimensional case, how it looks like.
Basically, in the 2 dimensional case, our every vector is a 2 dimensional vector or that is the 2 random variables are associated with that and mean vector is the expectation of the X1 and expectation of the second random variable X2 and my covariance matrix is having the variances of the first random variable and the second random variable and the covariance with respect to the first and the second random variable.
Page | 34
Advanced Certificate Programme in Applied Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
So, that is the property of the Gaussian density function, what we are having. And this Gaussian density function is widely, we will be using it as a probability density function, when we are dealing with respect to the Gaussian classifiers and also various related problems associated to that.
So, so far we looked into the key mathematical concepts, which are essential to understand the concepts of the machine learning and deep learning concepts, starting from the linear algebra, calculus and the probability theory, we have seen that. Most of these topics, which we have taken, it is just a tip of the iceberg, but there are many more things are very detailed, they are given in various books.
So, I have listed here the three books, the Bishop book on the, all the appendix of all these three books has a comprehensive discussions on the mathematical primaries associated for the pattern recognition in the machine learning is given there. So, especially in the Bishop book on the pattern recognition in machine learning, chapter one talks about the probability theory and it lists out the various probability density functions for the univariate case that is present. And also very nice, many more discussions, which we could not discuss in this case also will be as discussed over here.
Apart from that, all the three books has their appendix part with the brief discussions about the various mathematical preliminaries are also given there. So, I expect, I recommend you to at least go through them and brush up them. And that is very much essential when we were discussing about the various topics about the machine learning or the deep learning, you should be able to connect to that concepts. When we talk about these mathematical entities, you should be in a position to connect to that and then try to understand.