PART ONE
Fundamental Techniques in Handling People
CHAPTER 1
"If You Want to Gather Honey, Don't Kick Over the Beehive"
On May 7, 1931, the most sensational manhunt New York City had ever known had come to its climax. After weeks of search, "Two Gun" Crowley—the killer, the gunman who didn't smoke or drink—was at bay, trapped in his sweetheart's apartment on West End Avenue.

One hundred and fifty policemen and detectives laid siege to his top-floor hideaway. They chopped holes in the roof; they tried to smoke out Crowley, the "cop killer," with teargas. Then they mounted their machine guns on surrounding buildings, and for more than an hour one of New York's fine residential areas reverberated with the crack of pistol fire and the rut-tat-tat of machine guns. Crowley, crouching behind an over-stuffed chair, fired incessantly at the police. Ten thousand excited people watched the battle. Nothing like it had ever been seen before on the sidewalks of New York.  

When Crowley was captured, Police Commissioner E. P. Mulrooney declared that the two-gun desperado was one of the most dangerous criminals ever encountered in the history of New York. "He will kill," said the Commissioner, "at the drop of a feather."

But how did "Two Gun" Crowley regard himself? We know, because while the police were firing into his apartment, he wrote a letter addressed "To whom it may concern." And, as he wrote, the blood flowing from his wounds left a crimson trail on the paper. In this letter Crowley said:  

"Under my coat is a weary heart, but a kind one—one that would do nobody any harm."  

A short time before this, Crowley had been having a necking party with his girlfriend on a country road out on Long Island. Suddenly a policeman walked up to the car and said: "Let me see your license."  

Without saying a word, Crowley drew his gun and cut the policeman down with a shower of lead. As the dying officer fell, Crowley leaped out of the car, grabbed the officer's revolver, and fired another bullet into the prostrate body. And that was the killer who said: "Under my coat is a weary heart, but a kind one—one that would do nobody any harm."  

Crowley was sentenced to the electric chair. When he arrived at the death house in Sing Sing, did he say, "This is what I get for killing people"? No, he said:

"This is what I get for defending myself."

The point of the story is this: "Two Gun" Crowley didn't blame himself for anything.

The Rationalization of Criminals
Is that an unusual attitude among criminals? If you think so, listen to this:

"I have spent the best years of my life giving people the lighter pleasures, helping them have a good time, and all I get is abuse, the existence of a hunted man."

That's Al Capone speaking. Yes, America's most notorious Public Enemy—the most sinister gang leader who ever shot up Chicago. Capone didn't condemn himself. He actually regarded himself as a public benefactor—an unappreciated and misunderstood public benefactor.

And so did Dutch Schultz before he crumpled up under gangster bullets in Newark. Dutch Schultz, one of New York's most notorious rats, said in a newspaper interview that he was a public benefactor. And he believed it.

Lewis Lawes, who was warden of New York's infamous Sing Sing prison for many years, declared:

"Few of the criminals in Sing Sing regard themselves as bad men. They are just as human as you and I. So they rationalize, they explain. They can tell you why they had to crack a safe or be quick on the trigger finger. Most of them attempt by a form of reasoning, fallacious or logical, to justify their antisocial acts even to themselves, consequently stoutly maintaining that they should never have been imprisoned at all."

If Al Capone, "Two Gun" Crowley, Dutch Schultz, and the desperate men and women behind prison walls don't blame themselves for anything—what about the people with whom you and I come in contact?

The Futility of Criticism
John Wanamaker, founder of the stores that bear his name, once confessed:

"I learned thirty years ago that it is foolish to scold. I have enough trouble overcoming my own limitations without fretting over the fact that God has not seen fit to distribute evenly the gift of intelligence."

Wanamaker learned this lesson early, but I personally had to blunder through this old world for a third of a century before it even began to dawn upon me that ninety-nine times out of a hundred, people don't criticize themselves for anything, no matter how wrong it may be.

Criticism is futile because it puts a person on the defensive and usually makes him strive to justify himself.

Criticism is dangerous because it wounds a person's precious pride, hurts his sense of importance, and arouses resentment.

B. F. Skinner, the world-famous psychologist, proved through his experiments that an animal rewarded for good behavior will learn much more rapidly and retain what it learns far more effectively than an animal punished for bad behavior. Later studies have shown that the same applies to humans. By criticizing, we do not make lasting changes and often incur resentment.

Hans Selye, another great psychologist, said:

"As much as we thirst for approval, we dread condemnation."

The resentment that criticism engenders can demoralize employees, family members and friends, and still not correct the situation that has been condemned.

A Better Approach: A Case Study
George B. Johnston of Enid, Oklahoma, is the safety coordinator for an engineering company. One of his responsibilities is to see that employees wear their hard hats whenever they are on the job in the field.

The Old Approach: Whenever he came across workers who were not wearing hard hats, he would tell them with a lot of authority of the regulation and that they must comply. As a result, he would get sullen acceptance, and often after he left, the workers would remove the hats.

The New Approach: The next time he found some of the workers not wearing their hard hat, he asked if the hats were uncomfortable or did not fit properly. Then he reminded the men in a pleasant tone of voice that the hat was designed to protect them from injury and suggested that it always be worn on the job.

The Result: Increased compliance with the regulation with no resentment or emotional upset.

Historical Examples of Futile Criticism
You will find examples of the futility of criticism bristling on a thousand pages of history.

1. Theodore Roosevelt vs. William Howard Taft
When Theodore Roosevelt stepped out of the White House in 1908, he supported Taft, who was elected President. Then Roosevelt went off to Africa to shoot lions. When he returned, he exploded. He denounced Taft for his conservatism, tried to secure the nomination for a third term himself, formed the Bull Moose party, and all but demolished the G.O.P. In the election that followed, William Howard Taft and the Republican party carried only two states—Vermont and Utah. The most disastrous defeat the party had ever known.

Theodore Roosevelt blamed Taft, but did President Taft blame himself? Of course not. With tears in his eyes, Taft said:

"I don't see how I could have done any differently from what I have."

All of Theodore Roosevelt's criticism didn't persuade Taft that he was wrong. It merely made Taft strive to justify himself.

2. The Teapot Dome Scandal
Albert B. Fall, secretary of the interior in Harding's cabinet, was entrusted with the leasing of government oil reserves at Elk Hill and Teapot Dome. He handed the fat contract outright to his friend Edward L. Doheny, who gave Fall a "loan" of $100,000. Fall then ordered U.S. Marines to drive off competitors. The scandal ruined the Harding Administration, nauseated the nation, and put Fall behind prison bars.

Did Fall repent? Never! Years later, when Herbert Hoover suggested President Harding died of anxiety over being betrayed by a friend, Mrs. Fall screamed:

"What! Harding betrayed by Fall? No! My husband never betrayed anyone. This whole house full of gold would not tempt my husband to do wrong. He is the one who has been betrayed and led to the slaughter and crucified."

Abraham Lincoln's Greatest Lesson
On the morning of April 15, 1865, Abraham Lincoln lay dying. Secretary of War Stanton said:

"There lies the most perfect ruler of men that the world has ever seen."

What was the secret of Lincoln's success in dealing with people?

As a young man in Indiana, Lincoln not only criticized but wrote letters and poems ridiculing people, dropping them on country roads. In the autumn of 1842, he ridiculed a vain, pugnacious politician named James Shields in an anonymous letter published in the Springfield Journal.

Shields, boiled with indignation, tracked Lincoln down and challenged him to a duel to the death with cavalry broadswords. On the appointed day, they met on a sandbar in the Mississippi River, but at the last minute, their seconds interrupted and stopped the duel.

That incident taught Lincoln an invaluable lesson: Never again did he write an insulting letter. Never again did he ridicule anyone. And from that time on, he almost never criticized anybody for anything.

The Unsent Letter to General Meade
During the Civil War, after the Battle of Gettysburg (July 1863), General Lee was trapped against the swollen Potomac River. Lincoln saw a golden opportunity to capture Lee's army and end the war immediately. He explicitly ordered General Meade to attack Lee immediately without calling a council of war.

General Meade did the exact opposite:

He called a council of war in direct violation of orders.

He hesitated, procrastinated, and sent excuses.

Lee's forces escaped over the river.

Furious, Lincoln sat down and wrote Meade a stinging rebuke:

"My dear General,

I do not believe you appreciate the magnitude of the misfortune involved in Lee's escape. He was within our easy grasp, and to have closed upon him would, in connection with our other late successes, have ended the war. As it is, the war will be prolonged indefinitely... Your golden opportunity is gone, and I am distressed immeasurably because of it."

Meade never saw that letter. Lincoln never mailed it. It was found among his papers after his death.

Lincoln likely realized that sending the letter would relieve his own feelings, but it would make Meade try to justify himself, arouse hard feelings, impair his usefulness as a commander, and perhaps force him to resign from the army. Lincoln put the letter aside because he had learned that sharp criticisms almost invariably end in futility.

Self-Improvement vs. Criticism
Mark Twain wrote stinging letters when angry (such as telling a proofreader to retain suggestions in "the mush of his decayed brain"), but his wife secretly lifted them out of the mail. They were never sent.

Do you know someone you would like to change and regulate and improve? Good! But why not begin on yourself? From a purely selfish standpoint, that is a lot more profitable and a lot less dangerous.

"Don't complain about the snow on your neighbor's roof," said Confucius, "when your own doorstep is unclean."

When Carnegie was young, he wrote a letter to author Richard Harding Davis with the pretentious note at the bottom: "Dictated but not read." Davis returned it with a scribbled note: "Your bad manners are exceeded only by your bad manners." Even ten years after Davis's death, Carnegie admitted he still remembered the hurt of that sharp rebuke.

When dealing with people, let us remember we are not dealing with creatures of logic. We are dealing with creatures of emotion, creatures bristling with prejudices and motivated by pride and vanity.

Bitter criticism caused Thomas Hardy to give up writing fiction forever.

Criticism drove the poet Thomas Chatterton to suicide.

Benjamin Franklin, tactless in his youth, became American Ambassador to France by living by this secret:

"I will speak ill of no man, and speak all the good I know of everybody."

"Any fool can criticize, condemn and complain—and most fools do. But it takes character and self-control to be understanding and forgiving."

— Thomas Carlyle

The Lesson of Test Pilot Bob Hoover
Bob Hoover, a famous test pilot, was flying back to Los Angeles from an air show in San Diego when both engines suddenly stopped at 300 feet. By deft maneuvering, he landed the plane safely, though it was badly damaged.

The cause? His World War II propeller plane had been fueled with jet fuel instead of gasoline by a young mechanic.

When Hoover returned to the airport, the mechanic was crying, in agony over his mistake. Instead of unleashing a furious tongue-lashing, Hoover put his arm around the man's shoulder and said:

"To show you I'm sure that you'll never do this again, I want you to service my F-51 tomorrow."

"Father Forgets"
by W. Livingston Larned

Before you criticize your children, read this classic piece of American journalism, originally published in the People's Home Journal:

Listen, son: I am saying this as you lie asleep, one little paw crumpled under your cheek and the blond curls stickily wet on your damp forehead. I have stolen into your room alone. Just a few minutes ago, as I sat reading my paper in the library, a stifling wave of remorse swept over me. Guiltily I came to your bedside.

There are the things I was thinking, son: I had been cross to you. I scolded you as you were dressing for school because you gave your face merely a dab with a towel. I took you to task for not cleaning your shoes. I called out angrily when you threw some of your things on the floor.

At breakfast I found fault, too. You spilled things. You gulped down your food. You put your elbows on the table. You spread butter too thick on your bread. And as you started off to play and I made for my train, you turned and waved a hand and called, "Goodbye, Daddy!" and I frowned, and said in reply, "Hold your shoulders back!"

Then it began all over again in the late afternoon. As I came up the road I spied you, down on your knees, playing marbles. There were holes in your stockings. I humiliated you before your boyfriends by marching you ahead of me to the house. Stockings were expensive—and if you had to buy them you would be more careful! Imagine that, son, from a father!

Do you remember, later, when I was reading in the library, how you came in timidly, with a sort of hurt look in your eyes? When I glanced up over my paper, impatient at the interruption, you hesitated at the door. "What is it you want?" I snapped.

You said nothing, but ran across in one tempestuous plunge, and threw your arms around my neck and kissed me, and your small arms tightened with an affection that God had set blooming in your heart and which even neglect could not wither. And then you were gone, pattering up the stairs.

Well, son, it was shortly afterwards that my paper slipped from my hands and a terrible sickening fear came over me. What has habit been doing to me? The habit of finding fault, of reprimanding—this was my reward to you for being a boy. It was not that I did not love you; it was that I expected too much of youth. I was measuring you by the yardstick of my own years.

And there was so much that was good and fine and true in your character. The little heart of you was as big as the dawn itself over the wide hills. This was shown by your spontaneous impulse to rush in and kiss me good night. Nothing else matters tonight, son. I have come to your bedside in the darkness, and I have knelt there, ashamed!

It is a feeble atonement; I know you would not understand these things if I told them to you during your waking hours. But tomorrow I will be a real daddy! I will chum with you, and suffer when you suffer, and laugh when you laugh. I will bite my tongue when impatient words come. I will keep saying as if it were a ritual: "He is nothing but a boy—a little boy!"

I am afraid I have visualized you as a man. Yet as I see you now, son, crumpled and weary in your cot, I see that you are still a baby. Yesterday you were in your mother's arms, your head on her shoulder. I have asked too much, too much.

Conclusion
Instead of condemning people, let's try to understand them. Let's try to figure out why they do what they do. That's a lot more profitable and intriguing than criticism; and it breeds sympathy, tolerance and kindness. "To know all is to forgive all."

As Dr. Samuel Johnson said:

"God himself, sir, does not propose to judge man until the end of his days."

Why should you and I?

Principle 1
Don't criticize, condemn or complain.